
1600] Additional References. 53
cunning, that although none could deny himselfe to be
touched, yet none durst complaine that he was wronged.
For the man being of greater learning then the most, and
backed by the best in the land, was rather admired and
feared, then any way disgraced. Whoso shall read these
his works without preiudice, shall find that he was a man of
rare conceit and of great reading.
. . . . . . . . . .
[Sign. c. v.]
The Plowman's Tale.
A complaint against the pride and couetousnesse of the
cleargie: made no doubt by Chaucer with the rest of the
Tales. For I haue seene it in written hand in Iohn Stowes
Library in a booke of such antiquity, as seemeth to haue
beene written neare to Chaucers time.
[Sign c. v b.]
The Legend of Good Women.
For that some Ladies in the Court tooke offence at Chaucers
large speeches against the vntruth of women, the Queene
enioyned him to compile this booke in the commendation of
sundry maydens and wiues, who shewed themselues faithfull
to faithlesse men.
[In the second edn. of Speght’s Chaucer, 1602, these
‘Arguments' were removed from their place immediately
after the ‘Life,' and placed at the beginnings of the
respective works.]
1599. Dekker, Thomas, and Chettle, Henry, Troilus and Cressida
[“Troyeles & creassedaye," "Troyelles & cresseda,” a play men¬
tioned in Henslowe's Diary (ed. W. W. Greg., vol. i, pp. 104,
109) on April 7 and 16, 1599.]
[Rollins 48.]
[Probably indebted to Chaucer's Troilus. A rough plot
preserved among the Henslowe Papers (ed. Greg., p. 142),
shows clearly enough that the Testament of Cresseid was
used.]
[1600?] Atkinson, —, of Cambridge? [About this time was
christened Troilus Atkinson, later a bookseller. See Bibl. Soc.
Dictionary of Printers, 1668-1725. His parents' names and the
date of his birth are unknown. There was also a Sir Troilus
Turberville, a Royalist, who was killed in the Civil War, and who
was probably rather younger. These are the only definitely
Chaucerian christian names that we have found.]
