
1559] Additional References. 27
John Gower, whose life we have written. An historian and a
moral poet, he had attained to a venerable age, and his special aim
was to add finish to the English language.
He, knowing the character of Chaucer, and having proved its
uprightness, admitted him into a close friendship, took him to his
heart, showed him the most honourable affection–in fact, he almost
revered him as a god. Gower himself, in his book entitled Amantis,
gives abundant evidence of the high regard he had for his friend
Chaucer.
Having first of all praised him most fully, he calls him an
excellent poet, and constitutes him a sort of Aristarchus of his
work. Behold, reader, a beautiful rivalry in virtue. For, just as
Gower, thinking little of his own merit, modestly submitted his
works to Chaucer’s criticism, so in turn Chaucer referred the Loues
of Troilus to the criticisms of Gower and Strode. And since he
loved and honoured poetry above all things, it seemed to him to
be the most suitable road through which he could reach the
heights of fame. For this, indeed, is the nature of poetry, that it
not only admits of figures, grace of style, adornments in abundance
and all that is pleasing and beautiful, but that it demands it all as
a right. Add to this that he made use of the Italians and the
French, who have written tersely and beautifully in their own
languages. Dante and Petrarch in Italian, Alain [Chartier] in
French, John Mena in Spanish, and the many others who at that
time had written in polished language, were a spur to Chaucer.
It was, therefore, under good auspices that he set to work upon his
task, now translating books from the French, now skilfully rendering
Latin verses into English, now embodying the numerous creations
of his own imagination in imperishable works, equalling the most
felicitous productions of the Latins, endeavouring in every way to
be of some use to his readers. This also added to his reputation–
that he had a sister, who married William Pole, Duke of Suffolk,
and spent her life in splendour at Ewelme.]
1559. Elderton, William. The panges of Loue and louers F[i]ttes [a
ballad]. [Reprinted in J. P. Collier's Old Ballads, Percy Society,
vol. i, p. 25, and in H. L. Collmann’s Ballads and Broadsides,
Roxburghe Club, 1912, p. 111.]
[st. 2]
Know ye not, how Troylus
Languished and lost his joye,
With fittes and feuers meruailous
For Cresseda that dwelt in Troye;
Tyll pytie planted in her brest,
Ladie! ladie!
To slepe with him, and graunt him rest,
My dear ladie.
