
1557] Additional References. 21
[Free translation of above:
Geoffrey Chaucer, an English knight, distinguished both
for his courtesy and military talents, exhibited consummate
skill in the handling of the English language, and adorned
the age in which he lived. Besides mathematics, in which
he was proficient, he excelled as a poet, and rightly enjoys
to this day in England the same reputation as Dante and
Petrarch possessed of old in Italy, as having restored, nay
added, glory to his mother tongue. He translated for his
son, Lewis Chaucer, the treatise of Boethius on the Con¬
solation of Philosophy, and composed in English with great
appositeness and grace, the following poems in various
styles, some of which I have seen and the others heard of
on good authority from a friend.
[List of works follows.]
Of his other works I have not heard. It is related by
William White and other contemporary divines that Chaucer
by no means approved of the idloness of that great crowd
of mumblers, the monks, nor of their unintelligible prayers,
their relics and ceremonies. He is said to have lived until
the year 1450 of the Christian Era, in the reign of Henry VI.
Thomas Wyat, knight, of illustrious ancestry, combined
scholarship, gained at Cambridge, with loftiness of mind,
and equalled Chaucer in adorning his native tongue.]
1557. Unknown. A comparison of his loue with the faithful and
painfull loue of Troylus to Creside, ([a poem, in] Songes and
Sonettes [Tottel’s Miscellany]. (1st ed. 5 June, 1557, in Bodl.;
2nd ed., 31 July, 1557, 1st in B.M., f. 81. Ed. Arber, pp. 192-194.)
[Rollins 16.]
[The author borrowed Chaucer's details up to the point
where Cressid "yielded grace" to Troilus. He tells, e.g.,
how Troilus fell in love with Cressid at first sight, and how
he was so lovelorn that]
His chamber with his common walke,
Wherein he kept him se[c]retely,
He made his bedde the place of talke.
1557. Bale, John. Scriptorum Illustrium Maioris Brytanniæ...
Summarium, Basle, 1557-9, vol. i, pp. 525-7 [Life of Chaucer in
Bale’s 2nd edition], 702.
GALFRIDUS CHAVCER, XXIIII
Galfridus Chaucer, nobili loco natus, & summæ spei
iuuenis, Oxonienses scholas tam diligenter quàm qui
