
26 Appendix A. [A.D. 1557-
[Translation of Bale’s Life of Chaucer, 1557-59.
GEOFFREY CHAUCER, a nobleman by birth, gave much promise
as a youth. At Oxford, where he studied, he was one of the most
diligent scholars of his day. The vicinity of the university proved
an incentive to him, if as was surmised by Leland from certain
information, he was a native of Oxfordshire or Berkshire.
an elegant poet, a profound philosopher, and a devout theologian.
He left the university a keen dialectician, a graceful rhetorician,
by John Some and Nicholas Lynn, Carmelite friars of Lynn,
He was, moreover, a clever mathematician, having been taught
and skilled mathematicians. He paid tribute to them in his book
on the Astrolabe, and called them venerable clerics.
It is well known that towards the last years of Richard II's
reign, he attained great fame in France through his diligent
pursuit of letters. Further, he succeeded to an almost incredible
degree by the same means in acquiring the attractiveness, the
grace, the wit, and finally the charm of the French language. This
is the kind of praise which followed Geoffrey upon his return to
England, the inevitable accompaniment, as it were, of his
attainments.
He then frequented the London law-courts, and among the
members of the Inns of Court, where the laws of the country are
studied, he soon found an intimate friend in John Gower. These
two men had but one aim in their studies, which was to enrich the
English tongue in all kinds of verse. Nor did they desist until
they had brought the language to such a degree of eloquence and
brevity that it might be fit to take its place amongst the most
polished languages of all nations.
I shall not deem it troublesome to give the titles of his works
in Latin, for, as the proverb says, you know the lion by his claws.
I shall, therefore, append the list.
And he wrote many other works in which he showed his disap¬
[Here follows the list, see above, Latin version.]
proval of that great multitude of mumblers, the monks, of their
idleness, their unintelligible prayers, their relics, pilgrimages and
ceremonies.
Meanwhile Chaucer grew older, and felt that old age was an
illness, which continued to increase, until one day, while he was
attending to his affairs in London, he died. He was buried in the
south part of Westminster Abbey. He was still alive in the year
1402, as he himself testifies in his letter of Cupid. In his book of
Epigrams Leland praises Chaucer in the following lines— [quotes
Leland’s verses].
APPENDIX.
From the Catalogue of Leland
Among the lawyers in those days the most celebrated was
