[1390.] Gower, John. Confessio Amantis [first version]. Leave-taking
of Venus. Lib. octavus, ll. 2941-57. (Works of John Gower, ed.
G. C. Macaulay, 1899-1902, vol. iii, 1901, p. 466; for date and
MSS. see introd., vol. ii).
And gret wel Chaucer whan ye mete,
As mi disciple and mi poete:
For in the floures of his youthe
In sondri wise, as he wel couthe,
Of Ditees and of Songes glade,
The whiche he for mi sake made,
The lond fulfild is oueral:
Whereof to him in special
Aboue alle othre I am most holde
For thi now in hise daies olde
Thow schalt him telle this message,
That he vpon his latere age,
To sette an ende of alle his werk
As he which is myn owne clerk,
Do make his testament of loue,
As thou hast do thi schrifte aboue
So that mi Court it mai recorde.
[This passage does not occur in any later versions of the Confessio. For the whole
literature on the subject of the supposed quarrel between Gower and Chaucer, see
Chaucer, a bibliographical manual, by E. P. Hammond, N. York, 1908, pp. 278-9.
It is interesting to know that the 'Confessio' was translated into Portuguese, soon
after it was written, by Robert Payn, Canon of Lisbon Cathedral, and then into
Spanish (Castilian) proso by 'Juan de Cuenca, natural de Huete,' in 1400, whose
version is MS g ii 19, in the Library of the Escorial, Madrid. The Chaucer greeting
(Gower's Works, iii, 466 n, bk. viii, ll. 2941-56 ff.) runs thus: "Saluda de mi parte
a caucer, mi disciplo e mi poeta; quando con el topares, el qual por mi en la su
mancibia fiso toda su diligencia para componer y escreuir desyres e cantares de
diversas maneras de los quales toda la tierra es llena; por la qual cosa en especial le
soy mucho tenido mas que a ninguno de los otros. Por ende dile que le enbio
desir que tal esta en su postrimera hedad, por dar fyn a todas sus obras, se travaje
de faser su testamento de amor, asi como tu has fecho agora en tu confision."—
Gower's Works, ed. Macaulay, ii, clxvii-viii. As the Queen of Portugal was Henry
IV's sister, the presence of Robert Payn and other Englishmen in Portugal is easily
understood. See History.... of Henry IV by J. H. Wylie, vol ii, 1894, p. 329 et seq.]
