
340 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1715
1715. Gay, John. Letter from Gay and Pope to John Caryll [April
1715]. (Pope, Works, 1871, vol. vi, 1871, p. 227.)
Mr. Rowe’s Jane Grey is to be played in Easter week, when
Mrs. Oldfield is to personate a character directly opposite to
female nature—for what woman ever despised sovereignty?
Chaucer has a tale where a knight saves his head by discover¬
ing that it was the thing which all women most coveted.
[The first part of this letter is by Gay.]
1715. Hughes, [John]. Works of Edmund Spenser... publish'd by
Mr. Hughes, six vols., vol. i, Life, pp. ii, xv, xvii, xviii (quotes
Camden’s account of Spenser’s tomb: see above, p. 163).—Essay on
Allegorical Poetry, pp. xxvi, xxxvii.—Remarks on the Fairy
Queen, pp. Ixxxvii, xciv,—Remarks on the Shepherd’s Calendar,
pp. ciii, cvii, Glossary cxxi, cxxv, etc.
[p. ii] ... Edmund Spenser, the most Eminent of our Poets till
that time, unless we except Chaucer, who was in some respects
his Master and Original.  ...
[Mr. Waller says that a great misfortune which attends
[Essay   English Poets is that they are writing in a tongue which is
on
Alle¬
gorical   changing daily. They should therefore, like wise sculptors,
Poetry,   choose more durable material, and carve in Latin or Greek, if
p. xxvi]
they would have their labours preserved.] Notwithstanding
the Disadvantage he has mention'd, we have two Antient
English Poets, Chaucer and Spenser, who may perhaps be
reckon'd as Exceptions to this Remark. These seem to
have taken deep Root, like old British Oaks, and to
flourish in defiance of all the Injuries of Time and
Weather. The former is indeed much more obsolete in his
Stile than the latter; but it is owing to an extraordinary
native Strength in both, that they have been able thus far to
survive amidst the Changes of our Tongue, and seem rather
likely, among the Curious at least, to preserve the Knowledg
of our Antient Language, than to be in danger of being
destroy'd with it, and bury'd under its Ruins.
Tho Spenser's Affection to his Master Chaucer led him in
many things to copy after him, yet those who have read both
will easily observe that these two Genius's were of a very
different kind. Chaucer excell’d in his Characters; Spenser
[p.
in his Descriptions. The first study'd Humour, was an
xxvil]
excellent Satirist, and a lively but rough Painter of the
Manners of that rude Age in which he liv'd.  ...
. . . . . . . . . .
