
1709]  Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Hearne] 303
vers’d in most Parts of Learning. And besides his profound
Learning, he was a compleat Gentleman, & skill’d in all the
Arts of Address. These Qualifications made him belov’d and
honour’d, and his Conversation & Acquaintance were courted
by the Greatest Personages, insomuch that he was sent
Ambassadour into Forreign Parts, where he came of [sic] with
as much Applause, as he did in any of his Performances in his
own Native Country. This does not seem to be at all owing
to his Birth, his Father, not withstanding wealthy, being, in
all probability, only  a Merchant; tho’ I know, that Leland,
in which he is follow’d by Bale, tells us, that he was nobili
loco natus, which seems to be a mistake, there being no
Evidence now remaining, that we know of, to confirm such an
[p. 597] Assertion, unless it be that from the Roll of Battle-Abbey we
learn, that the Chaucers came with the Conqueror into
England, and that Pitts tells us, that his Father was a Knight.
Nor are we uncertain only as to his Ancestors, and his Quality,
but there are a great many other Particulars relating to him,
which, at present, we know nothing of, which I am perswaded
we might be satisfied in by a diligent Inspection into antient
Records. I have not time myself to assist in any such
Attempt: and therefore I leave it to your self and others, who
have both leisure and opportunity of going through so desirable
a Work.
§2. In which
We have several eminent Persons for
we have William
Precedents in this usefull Inquiry, which
Caxton, and
several other
cannot but add Life and Vigour to those
eminent Persons
who concern themselves in it. For soon
for Precedents.
after Printing was established in this Island,
William Caxton, besides divers other good Books, set him¬
self carefully about searching out and publishing the several
Pieces of Geffry Chaucer; but I much question whether he
printed divers of them together. For tho’ Stow and some
others inform us that he was the first that publish’d his
Works, yet I believe they are to be understood of some Pieces
printed by him in distinct and small Volumes, and not after
the Method that was follow’d by Successors. For Richard
Pynson, in his Preface to his Edition of the Canterbury Tales
(which we have amongst Mr. Selden’s MSS., and contains
nothing else) acquaints us, that he printed them from a Copy,
that was prepar’d for the Press by his Master William Caxton,
but gives not the least Hint that they had been before
