
1704] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion.       291
Good Shakespear himself is not so frequently Cited in the
following Pages, as he would otherwise deserve to be.   .....
[p. 25]
Thus the Troilus and Cressida of Chaucer is compos’d in
Stanzas consisting of 7 Verses.
1703. Hickes, George.   Linguarum  Vett.    Septentrionalium Thesaurus
Grammatico-Criticus et Archæ ologicus, 1705, pp.17 note, 27 note, 38
and note, 57-58, 65 note, 105.  (For p. 65 n. see Urry’s Chaucer,
1721, p. xxi.)
[p. 65,
note]
Legitur hæc Præpositio in veteribus nostris Scriptoribus, ut
in carmine Chauceri, quod inscribitur the Testament of
Creseide.
A bold season til a careful bite
Should correspond—...
[Throughout the book there are numerous references to Chaucer. There are
separate title-pages for parts 1 and 2, each dated 1708.]
[a. 1704.] Brown, Thomas (of Shifnal). Letters from the Dead to the
Living. The third and last letter of News from Signior Giusippe
Hanesio, high German Doctor in Brandipolis, to his Friends at
Will’s Coffee-house. ...[in] The Works of Mr. Thomas Brown,
ed. James Drake, 1707, vol. ii, the third part, pp. 206-7. [The
title page of the 2nd vol. states that the 3rd pt. was never before
printed. Brown died in 1704.]
[A dialogue in one of the coffee-houses of hell, between
Dryden and Chaucer.]  Sir, cries he [Chaucer], you have
[p. 207] done me a wonderful Honour to Furbish up some of my
old musty Tales, and bestow modern Garniture upon them,
and I look upon my self much oblig’d to you for so
undeserv’d a favour; however, Sir, I must take the Free¬
dom to tell you that you overstrain’d Matters a little, when
you liken’d me to Ovid, as to our Wit and manner of Versi¬
fication. Why, Sir, says Mr. Dryden, I maintain it, and
who then dares be so sawcy as to oppose me? But under
favour, Sir, cries the other, I think I should know
Ovid pretty well, having now conversed with him almost
three hundred Years, and the Devil’s in it if I don’t know my
own Talent, and therefore tho’ you past a mighty compliment
upon me in drawing this Parallel between us, yet I tell you
there’s no more resemblance between us as to our manner
of Writing, than there is between a Jolly well complexion’d
Englishman and a black-hair’d thin-gutted Italian. Lord, Sir,
