
1700] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Dryden] 281
[sign. *C 2b]
thought my Author was deficient, and had not given his
*C 2 b]
Thoughts their true Lustre, for want of Words in the Beginning
of our Language. And to this I was the more embolden'd,
because, (if I may be permitted to say it of my self) I found I
had a Soul congenial to his, and that I had been conversant in
the same Studies. Another Poet, in another Age, may take the
same Liberty with my Writings; if at least they live long
enough to deserve Correction. It was also necessary some¬
times to restore the Sense of Chaucer, which was lost or
mangled in the Errors of the Press : Let this Example suffice
at present in the Story of Palamon and Arcite, where the
temple of Diana is describ’d, you find these Verses in all the
Editions of our Author:
There saw I Danè turned unto a Tree,
I mean not the goddess Diane,
But Venus Daughter, which that hight Danè.
Which, after a little Consideration, I knew was to be reform'd
into this Sense, that Daphne, the daughter of Peneus, was
turn'd into a Tree. I durst not make thus free with Ovid,
lest some future Milbourn should arise, and say, I varied from
my Author, because I understood him not.
But there are other Judges, who think I ought not to have
translated Chaucer into English, out of a quite contrary Notion:
They suppose there is a certain Veneration due to his old
Language; and that it is little less than Profanation and
Sacrilege to alter it. They are farther of opinion, that some¬
what of his good Sense will suffer in this Transfusion, and
much of the Beauty of his Thoughts will infallibly be lost,
which appear with more Grace in their old Habit. Of this
Opinion was that excellent Person, whom I mention’d, the
late Earl of Leicester, who valued Chaucer as much as Mr.
Cowley despis’d him. My Lord dissuaded me from this
Attempt, (for I was thinking of it some Years before his Death,)
and his Authority prevail’d so far with me, as to defer my
Undertaking while he liv’d, in deference to him: Yet my
Reason was not convinc’d with what he urg’d against it. If
the first End of a Writer be to be understood, then, as his
Language grows obsolete, his Thoughts must grow obscure,
multa renascuntur, quæ nunc cecidere; cadentque quæ nunc
sunt in honore vocabula, si volet usus, quem penes arbitrium est
et jus et norma loquendi. When an ancient Word for
