
1723] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Dart] 365
of his Name, a hot warm Incendary, as (pity it is, too many
Creatures of the State-Faction pretending Wickliff's Opinions
were) one Pierse Ploughman. And, I think, this will need
no other Proof than what this Fellow says in his Tale of
another of his Performances, Of Freers I have spoken before
in a making of a Creed, &c. Now this same Pierse Plough¬
man wrote that very thing which is at the end of his Book, and
call’d a Creed of Fryers, which I have by me: For Mr. Fox,
who thinks Jack Upland must be it, or none, has mistaken a
Catechism for a Creed. Mr. Stow is more modest, as he was
more calm, and says, he had seen it in an antient Manu¬
script about Chaucer's Time, and (tho' he believes) does not
positively assert it to be his. These Arguments, or to the
like Purpose, I have laid down in the Life of Chaucer, which
lately was printed before the Christ-Church Edition, the Copy
of which was submitted to their Perusal, or some deputed by
them; and upon the Queries mark’d, I submitted to such
corrections as they thought proper. After which, when the
Book had been some time out, I found upon perusing it, that
all these Arguments were entirely omitted, and I am barely
made to assert, by my own Authority, that Chaucer never
wrote this Piece: Yet the Alterer has made me so modest
(without my knowledge, I am sure,) to refer to the Preface.
Upon which, at least, I expected the ingenious Gentleman
who wrote it, (and, I believe, knew nothing of what was said
in the Life,) had some better Arguments for what I had said.
But suddenly, to my Suprize, old Mr. Fox was set there
to stare me in the Face, and give the Lye, by no more
Authority, than what they allow’d me; and one, who, I
believe, was willing to make all the great Names he could
oppose the Innovations of the Times, and whose Zeal,
Passion, laborious Search, and Hurry, made him (I'm sorry
to say it) guilty of too many errors. This Usage was such
as, I hope, will influence the Reader to excuse my leading
him out of the way. The Life was in other Places alter'd,
as concerning Mr. Packer's Estate at Donington, and some
few other Places, which I cannot now remember: For the
Book I have never seen but upon a Bookseller’s Compter, not
being willing to buy it, when my old one, with my own written
Notes, serv’d me as well. This Usage, I think undeserv'd,
having spar'd no Pains, and was at a very extraordinary
Expence to collect Records, and write as particular and full a
Life as possible, of a Name I ever reverenc’d, and for a Body
