
392  Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1745-
have described the humours, passions &c. with great discern¬
ment. Yet none of them seem to have been half so well
acquainted with the very life and being of poetry, inven¬
tion, painting, and design, as Spenser. Chaucer was the
best before him; but then he borrowed most of his poems,
either from the ancients, or from Boccace, Petrarch, or the
Provençal writers, &c. Thus his Troilus and Cressida, the
largest of his works, was taken from Lollius; and the Romant
of the Rose, was translated from the French of John Noon,
[sic] an Englishman, who flourished in the reign of Richard II.
and so of the rest. As for those who follow'd him, such as
Heywood, Scogan, Skelton, &c. they seem to be wholly ignorant
of either numbers, language, propriety, or even decency itself.
I must be understood to except the Earl of Surry, Sir Thomas
Wiat, Sir Philip Sidney, several pieces in the mirror of
magistrates, and a few parts of Mr. G. Gascoign’s and
Turbervill's works.
[c. 1745.] Thompson, William. In Chaucer's Boure, Garden Inscrip¬
tions no. vii, [in] The Poetical Calendar... by Francis Fawkes
and William Woty, vol. viii, ed. 2, 1763, p. 103. [also in] Poetical
Works of William Thompson, ed. Park, British Poets, vol. 26, 1807.
p. 181.
In Chaucer's Boure.
Who is this thilke old bard which wonneth here?
This thilke old bard, sirs, is Dan Chaucer:
Full gentle knight was he, in very sooth,
Albee a little japepish [sic] in his youth.
He karoll’d deftly to his new psautry,
And eke couth tellen tales of jollity.
And sangs of solace, all the livelong day,
Soote as the ouzle or throstell in May.
Withouten words mo, a merie maker he,
Ne hopen I his permagall ¹ to see.
Ne Johnny Gay, perdie, ne Matthew Prior,
In diting tales of pleasaunce couth go higher.
Here in this gardyn full of flowers gend,
Betwixt this elder-tree and fresh woodbend,
He hearkeneth the foules' assemblie,
That fro the twigs maken their melodie.
Ye pied daisies, spring neath his feet,
Who sung so sootly, “The daisy is so sweet:"
¹ His equal.
