
1721] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 361
years, as Harding, Skelton and others; and in some places
it is to this day so smooth, concise, and beautiful, that even
Mr. Dryden would not attempt to alter it, but has copied
some of his Verses almost literatim: And Chaucer was the
first that adorned and amplified the English Tongue from the
Provençal...
[In the annotated copy of Urry’s Chaucer in B. M. (pr. m. 648. m. 4), Timothy
Thomas has written the following note at the head of Dart's Life of Chaucer: “This
Life was very uncorrectly drawn up by Mr. Dart, and corrected and enlarged by
W. T. [i. e. William Thomas], especially in that part which gives an accoᵗ. of the
Author's works, as will appear by the Or[iginal] with W. T.'s corrⁿˢ. reposited wᵗʰ
the Rᵗ. Honᵇˡᵉ, Edwᵈ, E. of Oxford &c. in his Library." See also Dart's remarks on
the way his "Life" was cut down and altered, below, p. 865.]
1721. Atterbury, Francis. Letter to Pope, dated Aug. 2, 1721, [printed
in] Pope's Works, 1871, vol. ix, p. 26.
I have found time to read some parts of Shakespeare, which
I was least acquainted with. I protest to you in a hundred
places I cannot construe him : I do not understand him. The
hardest part of Chaucer is more intelligible to me than some
of those scenes...
1721. Dart, John. Westminster Abbey, a Poem, 1721 [printed in]
Westmonasterium, by John Dart, 1742, vol. i, pp. xxxviii-ix.
[vol. i,
To Chaucer's Name eternal Trophies raise,
p. xxxviii]
And load the antique Stone with Wreaths of Bays;
Father of Verse! who in immortal Song
First taught the Muse to speak the English Tongue.
In early Time he rear'd his rev’rend Head,
When Learning was with thickening Mists o’erspread;
When rhyming Monks in barb’rous Numbers try
The Lives of Saints, and Feats of Errantry;
Above such trifling idle Tales as these
His Muse disdain'd by vulgar Ways to please:
On the fam’d Grœcian Bard he fix'd his Sight.
And saw his Beauties thro' a Cloud of Night;
With Flight advent’rous dar'd the darksom Way,
And gave the promise of a following Day;
And that he might his Meaning better meet
He made the Mantuan Verse a Lanthorn to his Feet
Justly design’d, and with a steddy View
And piercing Eye he look'd all Nature thro',
[p. xxxix] Not thro' the gaudy Prism and painted Glass,
But saw her plain, and drew her as she was.
