
1723] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 363
Chauceri, pulchro sane illo, & plurimum laudando; nimirum
quod non modo vere Epicum sit, sed Iliada etiam, atque
Æneida æquet, imo superet.
[See below, 1779-81, p. 458, Dr. Johnson's reference to Trapp in his Life of Dryden,
where he quotes this passage.]
1722. Wotton, Rev. William, D.D. Letter to the Rev. Moses Williams,
dated from Bath, May 5, 1722.
I have lately at by Houres amused my self wᵗʰ the new
Edition of Chaucer. The Glossary I read with great Pleasure;
who ever writ it is a very able Man. He seems to me to
understand Welsh; he quotes Welsh words every now and
then, & always to the purpose. If you know who writ it,
let me know; for I perceive Mr. Urry did little or nothing
in it.
[This extract is copied in MS. in the writing of Timothy Thomas (the author of
the Glossary) in his copy of Urry’s Chaucer [B. M. pr. m. 648, m. 4], vol. ii, on
the blank page before the Glossary.]
1723. Dart, John. Westmonasterium, or the History and Antiquities
of the Abbey Church of St. Peter's, Westminster, 2 vols., 1723,
[another edn.], 1742, vol. i, pp. 82-4, 86-9.
p.82]
Next adjoining to Mr. Drayton's, and between that and
Chaucer's Monument, is a curious Cenotaph of White¬
Marble...
[p. 88] ... Adjoining to this of Mr. Philips, is an antient Monu¬
ment of grey Marble in the Wall, erected to the Memory of
the Father of our English Poets, Geoffrey Chaucer, of whom I
have given a large Account in his Life; printed before the
last Edition of his Works; and shall therefore in this Place
give only some Hints of him.
[Here follows the usual description of Chaucer's life, followed
by one of his tomb.]
... His stone of broad Grey Marble, as I take it, was not
long since remaining; but was taken up when Mr. Dryden’s
Monument was erected, and sawn to mend the pavement..
[p. 86]... While I am speaking of Chaucer, give me the Liberty
of one Digression, (for I think I shall not trouble you with
many,) and that is to clear this great Man’s Character, and at
a long Distance — my own. It has been for many Years
believ’d, that Chaucer was the Author of that scandalous
railing Ballad, The Ploughman's Tale, and, I think, it has not
been contested. This, I know, makes him obnoxious to many
