
308 [Hearne]  Five Hundred Years of  [A.D. 1709
Pope is Anti-Christ, and they his Ministers. Such a Satyr,
made by a Person of his Note and Distinction, and so much
celebrated for his wonderfull fine Parts and exquisite Learning
and Judgement, could not but work mightily upon them,
especially when many of them had arriv’d at so high a Pitch
of Wickedness, and were, as it were, drown’d in Sloath and
Luxury, being much worse now than their Predecessors above
three hundred Years before, when most of even the Bishops
themselves were illiterate, tho’ ador’d and flatter’d upon
account of their Dignity and unbounded Wealth, and attended
[p. 604] upon by an amazing Number of Servants and Sycophants.
............
§6. If it be sup¬
But if, notwithstanding, what has been
pos’d to be authen¬
tick, ’tis likely
alleg’d, it be suppos’d, that this Revocation
’twas written by
is authentick, and that ’twas penn’d by
Chaucer towards
the latter end of
Chaucer himself, we may then conjecture,
Richard the
that ’twas done by him towards the latter
second’s Reign, he
end of the Reign of Richard II. when
being then old
and in disgrace,
having lost the favour of his Prince, and
for striking in
most of his noble Friends here, and being,
with the Multi¬
tude in some dan¬
withall, grown old, he retired himself from
[p. 605] gerous Enterprize.
the Pleasures of the World, and reflected
seriously upon the Changes and Infirmities
to which humane Nature is subject. This Consideration, with
the thoughts of a future State, could not but make him
renounce the Vanities of this Life, and retract those Passages,
which he perceiv’d, either bad [done] or might do Mischief to
Religion and Morality. After which he became quite weary
of this Life, and seem’d to have no relish for any thing in it;
tho’ that may be attributed chiefly, perhaps, to the Mis¬
fortunes which happen’d to him, he and his Lands being
taken into the King’s Protection in the second Year of his
Reign, because of some danger that seem’d to threaten from
his favouring and striking in with the rash Attempts of
the common-place. Whatever this Attempt was, whether
Rebellion, or something bordering upon it, ’tis certain he
forfeited the Love of his Prince and most of his Friends,
and he was forced to lead afterwards a melancholy Life,
which often extorted from him grievous Complaints, parti¬
cularly of his own Rashness in following the Multitude, and
sometimes would wish to exchange Life for Death,¹ which
¹ This may be seen in the Complaint he made to his empty Purse, which
Mr. Speght found ten times larger in Mr. Stow’s MS. than in the Print.
