
1709]  Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Hearne] 309
Misery, however, was fortunate in this, that it prepar’d him
the better for Eternity, and influenced him to retract all the
loose Things in his Writings.
Now the Plough-man’s Tale having given
§7. The reason
more offence than all the rest of Chaucer’s
why the Plough-
Works, perhaps that is the reason why it
man’s Tale is
found but in few
appears in so few MSS. I have not
MSS. Some think
found it in one of those I have consulted at
’twas not Chau¬
cer’s, but if his,
Oxford, which has made some think, that
it is improperly
’tis not Chaucer’s, and this they believe
call’d a Tale.
confirm’d from the Style, which is different
from his other Poëms. Mr. Pitts confounds it with the
Satyr, that is call’d Piers Plowman; but the Publishers have
skillfully ascrib’d it to him, being warranted from a MS. in
Mr. Stow’s Library; tho’ it must be confessed, that ’tis not
properly term’d a Tale, and it does not seem to have been put
as one of the Tales by the Author himself: for they were
suppos’d¹ to have been spoken and not written, as this is
plainly said to be, the Plowman concluding thus:
To holy Church I will me bow,
Each man to amend him Christ send space:
And for my writing me allow
He, that is almighty, for his Grace.
The same word of writing is there made use of several
times: as, for my writing if I habe blame —and,
Of my writing have me excused: which seems to me an
undeniable Argument, that it was not delivered as all the
rest were.
I might from this occasion insist upon divers others Parti¬
culars, but I have already exceeded the Bounds of a Letter,
and I am afraid I have quite tired your Patience. I hope,
however, you will take what I have said as an instance of my
Readiness to serve you, being, with all sincerity,
Sir,
Your very humble Servant,
Tho. Hearne.
[A MS. note by W. Thomas in Urry’s edn. of Chaucer’s Works, 1721, B.M. pr. m.
643. m. 4, on blank leaf to f. p. 32, states that this letter was written in 1709.]
¹ See a Note at the Beginning of the Tales in MS. (in Bibl. Bodl. inter Codd.
Laud. K. 50) by John Barcham. [See above, 1642, pp. 221-2.]
