
284 [Dryden] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1700
Vertue, which is the true Nobility. When I had clos’d
Chaucer, I return’d to Ovid, and translated some more of his
Fables; and, by this time, had so far forgotten The Wife of
Bath's Tale, that when I took up Boccace, unawares I fell
on the same Argument of preferring Virtue to Nobility of
Blood, and Titles, in the Story of Sigismonda; which I had
certainly avoided for the Resemblance of the two Discourses,
if my Memory had not fail’d me. Let the Reader weigh both;
and if he thinks me partial to Chaucer, 'tis in him to right
Boccace.
I prefer in our Countryman, far above all his other Stories,
the Noble Poem of Palamon and Arcite, which is of the
Epique kind, and perhaps not much inferior to the Ilias or
the Æneis: the Story is more pleasing than either of them, the
Manners as perfect, the Diction as poetical, the Learning as
deep and various; and the Disposition full as artful : only it
includes a greater length of time; as taking up seven years at
least; but Aristotle has left undecided the Duration of the
Action; which yet is easily reduc'd into the Compass of a
year, by a Narration of what preceded the Return of Palamon
to Athens. I had thought for the Honour of our Nation,
and more particularly for his, whose Laurel, tho' unworthy,
I have worn after him, that this Story was of English Growth,
and Chaucer's own : But I was undeceiv'd by Boccace; for
casually looking on the End of his seventh Giornata, I found
Dioneo, (under which name he shadows himself,) and Fiametta,
(who represents his Mistress, the natural Daughter of Robert,
King of Naples) of whom these Words are spoken. Dioneo e
Fiametta gran pezza cantarono insieme d’Arcita, e di Palemone:
by which it appears, that this Story was written before the
time of Boccace; but the Name of its Author being wholly
lost, Chaucer is now become an Original; and I question not
but the Poem has receiv’d many Beauties, by passing through
his Noble Hands. Besides this Tale, there is another of his
own Invention, after the manner of the Provençalls, call’d The
Flower and the Leaf; with which I was so particularly pleas'd,
both for the Invention and the Moral, that I cannot hinder
myself from recommending it to the Reader.
. . . . . . . . . . .
[sign. A1] [Poem] To Her Grace The Dutchess of Ormond.
Madam,
The Bard who first adorn’d our Native Tongue
Tun'd to his British Lyre this ancient Song:
