
344 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1716-
1716. Hearne, Thomas. Extract from his Diary, June 26, 1716, [in]
Remarks and Collections of T. Hearne, Oxford Hist. Soc, vol. v,
ed. D. W. Rannie, 1901, p. 241, and App. p. 382.
The Note here pasted in about Occleve I had from Mr.
John Murray of London, who hath got a fine MS. of Occleve
de Regimine Principis, with Chaucer's Picture done by
Occleve :—
Thomas Hoccleve wrote this Book about yᵉ year of our
Lord 1400, and dedicated and presented it to Henry, Duke
of Monmouth. This Hoccleve was Friend and, by his own
Testimony, Scholar of Geofry Chaucer &  Jn° Gower, whose
wit and Eloquence he largely Extolls, and has depicted the
Portraiture of Geofry Chavcer in yᵉ Margin of yᵉ 71 Page,
with yᵉ praises of yᵉ same Chavcer.  ...
1716. Brome, William. Letter to Thomas Hearne, dated Sept. 19, 1716
(Rawl. 3 130) [abstract in] Remarks and Collections of T. Hearne,
Oxford Hist. Soc., vol. v, ed. D. W. Rannie, 1901, pp. 314-5.
If you are acquainted with Mʳ. Tickell of Queen's Coll.
Enquire of him whether he ever lent Mʳ. Urry an old Chaucer,
that if he has, I may look after the Book.
1716. Proposals for Printing Chaucer's Works, dated June 30, 1716,
inserted before the title page of the interleaved and annotated copy
of Urry's edn. of Chaucer in B. M. [pr. m. 643. m. 4].
Proposals for printing by subscription the Works of the
celebrated and ancient English Poet Jeoffrey Chaucer: Care¬
fully compar'd, not only with former Editions of Value, but
with many rare and ancient MANUSCRIPTS: From the Collating
of which the Text is in a great Measure restor'd and perfected;
many Errors and Corruptions that have crept in, and continued
in all the Editions hitherto printed, are amended; and many
whole Lines, omitted in all the Printed Editions, are inserted
in their proper Places.
Three entire New TALES of this Author in Manuscript
(never yet printed) have been recovered, and will be added
to this Edition; by which Alterations, Amendments, and
Additions, this Work is in a manner become new.
This Work was at first undertaken and was very near com¬
pleated by John Urry, Student of Christ-Church, Oxon, and is
now finish'd from his Papers by a Member of the same College.
A more Useful and Copious Glossary, for the better Under¬
