
1747] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 393
And whilest, “benedicite," he sings,
Ryn little beck, in silver murmurings,
O pleasaunt poete, thyselven solace here,
And merie be thy heart, old Dan Chaucer.
[17]46. Rudd, Abraham Joseph. Two letters from S. John's College,
Oxford, dated respectively April 21 and 29, [17]46, to Mr. Ames
[Joseph Ames, the bibliographer and antiquary] Wapping Street,
near the Hermitage, London; describing Caxton’s first edition of
the Canterbury Tales [no criticism of Chaucer. These letters are
now inserted in the copy of Caxton’s first edn. of the Canterbury
Tales in B. M. (pr. m. 167. c. 26).]
[See Ames's Typographical Antiquities, 1749, p. 55.]
1746. Unknown. Poem [in] The Gentleman's Magazine. See below,
App. A.
1746. Upton, John. Critical Observations on Shakespeare, pp. 193, 327.
[" Fere" and “atwain,” old words used by Chaucer.]
[See the enlarged edn. of 1748, below, p. 396, for many more Chaucer allusions.]
1747. Mason, William. Musæus, a monody to the memory of Mr. Pope,
in imitation of Milton’s Lycidas, pp. 8-10.
First, sent from Cam’s fair banks, like Palmer old,
Came TITYRUS¹ slow, with head all silver'd o’er,
And in his hand an oaken crook he bore,
And thus in antique guise short talk did hold.
‘Grete clerk of Fame’is house, whose excellence
Maie wele befitt thilk place of eminence,
Mickle of wele betide thy houres last,
For mich gode wirkè to me don and past.
For syn the daies whereas my Iyre ben strongen,
And deftly many a mery laie I songen,
Old Time, which alle things don maliciously,
Gnawen with rusty tooth continually,
Gnattrid my lines, that they all cancrid ben,
Till at the last thou smoothen ’hem hast again;
Sithence full semely gliden my rymes rude,
As, (if fitteth thilk similitude),
Whannè shallow brooke yrenneth hobling on,
Ovir rough stones it maken full rough song;
But, them stones removen, this lite rivere
Stealen forth by, making plesaunt murmere :
So my sely rymes, whoso may them note,
Thou maken everichone to ren right sote;
¹ i.e. CHAUCER, a name frequently given him by Spenser. [Note by Mason. ]
