
364 [Dart] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1723
Men of Letters, especially those who are Roman Catholicks.
But their Resentment will cease to appear, when I almost
evidently prove to them, that this Piece came from a Quarter
of less Learning, and more ill Manners; and that Chaucer,
who was a fine Gentleman, and one who had a Value for, and
was valu'd by the better Sort of the Clergy of that Time,
would never have fallen so rudely foul on the whole Order,
when his Practice was only to lash those who were obnoxious
to the rest. First then, we must observe, that this Tale is
in none of the antient Manuscripts of Chaucer, not in any one
I have seen, neither in that curious one of my Lord Harley,
nor in those in the King's Library, which were borrow'd for
Mr. Urry: But after the verse, By this the Manciple had his
Tale I ended, &c., comes on The Parson's Prologue and Tale;
whereas they have in the printed Copies thrust this in
between, and, to favour the Deceit, chang’d the very Verse,
and made it, By this the Ploughman had his Tale y ended,
&c. And, indeed, the Tale it self seems to be of a different
Piece, having no Introduction; and this Ploughman seems
abruptly to have fallen in with them by the way, and to be
a different sort of a Creature from that modest, quiet, good
Parishoner, that came with his Parson to them at Southwark;
they are not more different in their Dresses, than in their
Manners and Characters. The first came upon a Horse:
This Fellow is presented with a Pilgrim’s Staff, a cumbersome
Utensil for one that rides. Chaucer has taken care to give
his Farmer the Character of a quiet useful Man to others,
and one that chearfully paid his Tithes; or else indeed I think
he would have been strangely out, to have brought the Parson
with him : But this ill-bred, saucy Fellow minds nothing but
the satisfaction of Gain, having left his Cattle in Grass up to
the Chin; and indeed we may perceive him to be a covetous
[p. 87] Hog, by his railing against Tithes, the too common Cry of
those sordid Wretches. Now if, having set these two Men
before you, you can still think them the same, I'Il tell you
the very Places they came from; and tho' I believe (with
Mr. Stow) that they were both born at a time, yet they had
very different Originals; one had to his Father our learned,
I may safely say, religious, and well-bred Poet, (for the
Obscenity of his Writings, I have sufficiently spoke of both
Prose and ¹Verse, tho' the first, I think, is left out in the
printed Copy of the Life:) The other was the Son of one
1 Poem on Chaucer and his Writings, Lond. 1722
