
1700] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 271
1699. Pepys, Samuel. Letter to John Dryden dated July 14, 1699.
[in] (The Works of John Dryden, ed. Sir W. Scott, revised G.
Saintsbury, 1882-93, vol. xviii, p. 155). [See above, under Dryden,
for the letter to which this is the answer.]
Sir,
You truly have obliged mee; and possibly in saying so,
I am more in earnest then you can readily think; as verily
hopeing, from this your copy of one “Good Parson" to fancy
some amends made mee for the hourly offence I beare with
from the sight of so many lewd originalls.
[a. 1700. Cobb, Samuel.] Poetæ Britannici. A Poem, p. 10. [A
pamphlet, folio, no title page; from internal evidence (Dryden,
old, but alive, &c.) it must have been written just before 1700. It
is reprinted in Poems on Several Occasions, by Samuel Cobb, 3rd
edition, London, 1710, pp. 188-9, under the title Of Poetry.
1. Its Antiquity. 2. Its Progress. 3. Its Improvement.]
Sunk in a Sea of Ignorance we lay,
Till Chaucer rose, and pointed out the Day,
A joking Bard, whose Antiquated Muse
In mouldy Words could solid Sense produce.
Our English Ennius He, who claim’d his part
In wealthy Nature, tho' unskilld in Art.
The sparkling Diamond on his Dung-hill shines,
And Golden Fragments glitter in his Lines.
Which Spencer gather'd for his Learning known,
And by successful Gleanings made his own.
So careful Bees, on a fair Summer's Day,
Hum o’er the Flowers, and suck the sweets away.
Of Gloriana, and her Knights he sung,
Of Beasts, which from his pregnant Fancy sprung.
O had thy Poet, Britany, rely'd
On native Strength, and Foreign Aid deny'd!
Had not wild Fairies blasted his design,
Mœonides and Virgil had been Thine!
Their finish’d Poems he exactly view'd,
But Chaucer’s steps Religiously pursu’d.
He cull’d and pick’d, and thought it greater praise
T’adore his Master, than improve his Phrase.
Twas counted Sin to deviate from his Page;
So sacred was th' Authority of Age!
The Coyn must sure for currant Sterling pass
Stamp’d with old Chaucer's Venerable Face.
