
376 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1734-
The word shent, disgraced, shamed... is frequent both in
Chaucer and Spenser.
[pp. 95-6] But by the forge that stythied Mars his helm [Act IV, sc. v,
l. 255]...
A Stithy or Stith signifies an Anvil. So CHAUCER in his
Knight's Tale [l. 2025].  . . . But I own I suspect this not to
have been our Author's Word. [Theobald in the text emended
the word to smithied.]
[p. 114] [Theobald refers to the Destruction of Troy printed by
Caxton, ] from which Book our Poet has borrow'd more
Circumstances of this Play, than from Lollius or Chaucer.
[The Shakespeare references are to the edn., of W. G. Clark and W. A. Wright,
vol. xxv, 1893.]
1734-35. Hearne, Thomas. Letter to Dr. Richard Rawlinson, March 13,
1734-5 [in] Letters written by Eminent Persons... 1813, vol. ii,
pp. 97-8.
Dear Sir,
I thank you for the large parcel of books I received
from you on Saturday last, the 15th inst. Several of them
are old Chaucers', such as what you mentioned some time
since. The more I look upon such old black-lettered editions,
the more I wish that the late edition had been printed in the
black letter, which was what my friend Mr. Urry intirely
designed, as I have often heard him say, tho' the managers
afterwards, for frivolous reasons, acted contrary to it. Curious
men begin to esteem the old editions more than the new one,
partly upon account of the letter, and partly upon account of
the change that hath been made in the new edition, without
giving the various lections, which would have been of great
satisfaction to critical men. John Stowe was an honest man,
and knowing in these affairs, and would never have taken such a
liberty, and I have reason to think Mr. Urry would (what I
used often to tell him to do) have accounted for the alterations
with a particular nicety, had he lived to have printed the book
himself.  ...
1735. Hearne, Thomas. Appendix ad Prœfationem. The Publishers
Addition to the Account of Dr. Borde in Athenœ Oxon: [in]
Benedictus Abbas Petroburgensis, De Vita et Gestis Henrici II et
Ricardi I [ed. T. Hearne], vol. i, pp. Iv-Ivi.
Robert Burton being so curious and diligent in collecting
judicious and merry little pieces, 'tis no wonder, that he pro¬
cured likewise Dʳ Borde’s right pleasant and merry history of
