
1700] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Dryden] 275
two Poets; and I have sav'd my self one half of that Labour, by
owning that Ovid liv'd when the Roman Tongue was in its
Meridian; Chaucer, in the Dawning of our Language : There¬
fore that Part of the Comparison stands not on an equal
Foot, any more than the Diction of Ennius and Ovid; or of
Chaucer and our present English. The Words are given up
as a Post not to be defended in our Poet, because he wanted
the Modern Art of Fortifying. The Thoughts remain to be
consider'd: And they are to be measur'd only by their
Propriety; that is, as they flow more or less naturally from the
Persons describ'd, on such and such Occasions. The Vulgar
Judges, which are Nine Parts in Ten of all Nations, who call
Conceits and Jingles Wit, who see Ovid full of them, and
Chaucer altogether without them, will think me little less than
mad for preferring the Englishman to the Roman: Yet, with
their leave, I must presume to say, that the Things they admire
are only glittering Trifles, and so far from being Witty, that in
a serious Poem they are nauseous, because they are unnatural.
Wou'd any Man, who is ready to die for Love, describe his
Passion like Narcissus? Wou’d he think of inopem me copia
fecit, and a Dozen more of such Expressions, pour'd on the
Neck of one another, and signifying all the same Thing? If
this were Wit, was this a Time to be witty, when the poor
Wretch was in the Agony of Death? This is just John Little¬
wit, in Bartholomew Fair, who had a Conceit (as he tells you)
left him in his Misery; a miserable Conceit. On these
Occasions the Poet shou’d endeavour to raise Pity : But, instead
[sign. *B 2]
*B2]
of this, Ovid is tickling you to laugh. Virgil never made use
of such Machines when he was moving you to commiserate the
Death of Dido: He would not destroy what he was building.
Chaucer makes Arcite violent in his Love, and unjust in the
Pursuit of it: Yet, when he came to die, he made him think
more reasonably: He repents not of his Love, for that had
alter'd his Character; but acknowledges the Injustice of his
Proceedings, and resigns Emilia to Palamon. What would
Ovid have done on this Occasion? He would certainly have
made Arcite witty on his Death-bed. He had complain'd he was
further off from Possession, by being so near, and a thousand
such Boyisms, which Chaucer rejected as below the Dignity of
the Subject. They who think otherwise, would by the same
Reason, prefer Lucan and Qvid to Homer and Virgil, and
Martial to all Four of them. As for the Turn of Words, in
