
382 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1737-
[p.
xxvi]
Numerosity (as Bp. Sprat expresses it in his Life of Cowley,
which, by the way, runs parallel with our Author's in many
Cases) was not Chaucer's main Care; but that he had some¬
times a greater Regard for the Sense, than the Metre: His
Numbers, however, are, by no Means so rough and inhar¬
monious as some People imagine; there is a charming Sim¬
plicity in them, and they are always musical, whether they
[p.
want or exceed their Complement.  ...
xxvii]
As to the final E, it was anciently pronounc’d, no doubt,
in feminine Adjectives, both from the Saxon and French, and
in those Substantives, that from the old Saxon are made
English, by changing a into e.  ... However, our Author
seems to have taken the Liberty to use it or not, as it best
served his Metre; But give me leave to observe, that he has
never used it in any even Place, except the 2d, where it is
allowable, especially if the Accent be strong upon the 4ᵗʰ.
Whanné that Apryl. v. 1.
Thatté no Drop. v. 131.
I say, that the final E, (and I believe I might say the same
of the plural es or is, especially of Monosyllables,...) is
never used in the 4ᵗʰ, 6ᵗʰ, 8ᵗʰ, or last Syllable of the Verse,
which is a Fault that most injudiciously runs thro' Mr. Urry’s
whole edition.
In a Gounè. v. 393.
And in a Glass haddè he, 699.
... [pp. xxviii-xxxiv, remarks on Chaucerian English and
grammar].
[p.
xxxv]
So lively are Chaucer's Descriptions, that only to read them,
is to carry Life back again, as it were, 300 Years, and to join
Conference with his merry Crew in their Pilgrimage to
Canterbury. From whence we may observe, that Nature is
still the same, however alter'd in her outward Dress, and
the Man that, like Chaucer and Shakespear, can trace her in
her most secret Recesses, will be sure, in every Age, to please.
1737. Pope, Alexander. The Second Book of the Epistles of Horace.
Imitated by Mr. Pope. Printed for T. Cooper.—Epistle i, To
Augustus, p. 3. (Works, 1871, vol. iii, p. 351.)
[l. 31]
Just in one instance, be it yet confest
Your People, Sir, are partial in the rest.
Foes to all living worth except your own,
[l. 35]
And Advocates for Folly dead and gone.
