
304 [Hearne]  Five Hundred Years of  [A.D. 1709
printed. Caxton and Pynson having spent their time so
successfully upon Chaucer, and so much to the Content and
Approbation of learned Men, others were soon animated to
[p. 598] advance and promote what they had begun; and accordingly
several Editions follow’d with Improvements, as you have
particularly specify’d in your Paper: but Caxton and Pynson
were exceeded in their Labours by William Botevil, alias
Thinne, Esq., who having collected all the old Copies of
Chaucer that he could any ways procure, and having with great
Exactness corrected a vast number of Places, and made con¬
siderable Additions, amongst which must not be passed by his
Notes and Explications, publish’d the Work in one Volume in
Folio in the Year¹ MDXL. (not in MDXLII. as Mr. Wood insinu¬
ates²) which was printed at London by Thomas Bertholet [sic],
as is noted by Mr. Leland,³ and dedicated to K. H. VIII.
Twenty Years after this John Stow⁴ the Antiquary collated
this edition with several MSS. (some of which, I suppose,
are part of those that had been collected a great many Years
before by John Shirley Esq., who died in the Year MCCCCLVI⁵
and not in MCCCCLXV. as you mistake) added some Pieces not
printed before, and in the Year MDXCVII. joyn’d to him divers
Poëms of Lidgate; which being done, he drew up an Account
of Chaucer’s Life, of his Prefermentc, Issue and Death, collected
out of Records in the Tower and other Places, which he at
length communicated to Thomas Speght, who publish’d him
the same Year, with the said Improvements of Stow and his
own, and methodiz’d his Life according to his own Judgement.
After this Francis Thinne, Lancaster-Herald at Arms, a
Person very well vers’d in Antiquities, and descended, as it
seems,⁶ from the before mentioned William Thinne, but not
[p. 599] his Son as is affirm’d by Speght in his Life of Chaucer, corrected
this Edition in abundance of Places, drew up several Notes to
it, and put them into the Hands of the said Mr. Speght, who
remitted them into another Edition of Chaucer printed in
Folio in MDCII. which is the most compleat Edition we have
yet, and, besides the Explication of old and obscure Words,
contains great Variety of Improvements, that were not in
former Impressions. But I shall not trouble you with a
Catalogue of the Editions of Chaucer, which you are acquainted
¹ See Stow’s Annals Edit. fol. p. 326, and Mr. Leland de Scriptorib.
in vita Chauceri.
Athenæ Oxon., vol. i, col. 53.  ³Loco citato.
⁴ See his Annals loc. cit.
⁶ See Wood’s Athenæ Oxon., vol. i, col. 320.
⁵ See Stow’s Survey of London, p. 416.
