
338 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1715.
1715. Elstob, Elizabeth. The Rudiments of Grammar for the English¬
Saxon Tongue, first given in English: with an Apology for the
study of Northern Antiquities. Being very useful toward the
understanding our ancient English Poets, and other Writers. By
Elizabeth Elstob... London... 1715. Preface, pp. xvi-xviii,
note, xix, xxiv, xxviii-ix.
[Paraphrase of pp. xi-xiii. An Examination of (1) whether
the charge made against the Northern languages is true, that
they consist of nothing but Monosyllables; and (2) whether
the copiousness and variety of Monosyllables may be always
justly reputed a fault. The answer to (1) is that the ancient
Northern languages (Gothick, Saxon and Teutonick) do not
wholly nor mostly consist of Monosyllables. The answer to
(2) is that if copiousness and variety of Monosyllables be a
fault, it is one that might as justly be charged upon Latin and
Greek–here follow examples from Greek and Latin poets.
Not only so, but in modern poets we find great use of mono¬
syllables, even in Dryden, who would have us believe he had
a great aversion to them; note Denham’s lines on Cooper's
Hill, which Dryden so admires.]
[p. xvi] To give greater Probability to what I have said concerning
Monosyllables, I will give some Instances, as well from such
Poets as have gone before him [Dryden], as those which have
succeeded him. It will not be taken amiss by those who
value the Judgment of Sir Philip Sydney, and that of
Mr. Dryden, if I begin with Father Chaucer.
Er it was Day, as was her won to do.
Again,
And but I have her Mercy and her Grace,
That I may seen her at the leste way;
I nam but deed there nis no more to say.
Again,
[p. xvii]
Alas, what is this wonder Maladye:
For heate of colde, for colde of heate I dye.
Chaucer's first Book of Troylus, fol. 159, b. [11. 419-20]
. . . . . . . .
But before, at least contemporary with Chaucer, we find
Sir John Gower, not baulking Monosyllables; . .
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. xviii,
Besides the Purpose for which these Verses are here cited,
note]
it may not be amiss to observe from some Instances of Words
contain'd in them, how necessary, at least useful, the Know¬
ledge of the Saxon Tongue is, to the right understanding
