
278 [Dryden] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1700
Mecænas, who recommended Virgil and Horace to him; whose
Praises helped to make him Popular while he was alive, and
after his Death have made him Precious to Posterity. As
for the Religion of our Poet, he seems to have some little
Byas towards the Opinions of Wicliff, after John of Ghant
his Patron; somewhat of which appears in the Tale of Piers
Plowman: Yet I cannot blame him for inveighing so sharply
against the Vices of the Clergy in his Age: Their Pride,
their Ambition, their Pomp, their Avarice, their Worldly
Interest, deserv'd the Lashes which he gave them, both in
that, and in most of his Canterbury Tales : Neither has his
Contemporary Boccace, spar'd them. Yet both those Poets
liv'd in much esteem, with good and holy Men in Orders:
For the Scandal which is given by particular Priests reflects
[sign. *C1]
not on the Sacred Function. Chaucer's Monk, his Chanon,
*C1]
and his Fryar, took not from the Character of his Good
Parson. A Satyrical Poet is the Check of the Laymen on bad
Priests......
I have followed Chaucer, in his Character of a Holy Man,
and have enlarg'd on that Subject with some Pleasure, re¬
serving to myself the Right, if I shall think fit hereafter, to
describe another sort of Priests, such as are more easily to
be found than the Good Parson; such as have given the
last Blow to Christianity in this Age, by a Practice so contrary
to their Doctrine. But this will keep cold till another time.
In the mean while, I take up Chaucer where I left him.
He must have been a Man of a most wonderful comprehen¬
sive Nature, because, as it has been truly observ'd of him, he
has taken into the Compass of his Canterbury Tales the
various Manners and Humours (as we now call them) of the
whole English Nation, in his Age. Not a single Character has
escap’d him. All his Pilgrims are severally distinguish'd from
each other; and not only in their Inclinations, but in their
[sign.
very Phisiognomies and Persons. Baptista Porta could not
*C1]
have describ'd their Natures better, than by the Marks which
the Poet gives them. The Matter and Manner of their Tales,
and of their Telling, are so suited to their different Educations,
Humours, and Callings, that each of them would be improper
in any other Mouth. Even the grave and serious Characters
aro distinguish'd by their several sorts of Gravity: Their
Discourses are such as belong to their Age, their Calling, and
their Breeding; such as are becoming of them, and of them
