
300 [Hearne]  Five Hundred Years of  [A.D. 1709
in the author’s Life Time, or very soon after, concludes thus:
[quotes the ending, ‘ This blisfull regne’ ...‘ Qui cum
patre, &c.’ ].
[p. 197] Chaucer not of Oxfordsh. —or Barksh. as Leland supposed,
but of London, as appears from his Testament of Love. His
Father suppos’d to be Rich. Chaucer vintner of Lond. in
the 23 of Ed. 3. Eliz. Chaucer, in Rich.  IIᵈˢ. time, a
Nunne, who was perhaps his sister, or at least one of his
Relations. The nobili loco of Leland & Bale to be under¬
stood of the Place of his Nativity, he being not of great Birth,
as appears from his arms, wᶜʰ were parted per Pale arg. & g.
a Bend counterchang’d. Yet this argument rejected by the
writer of his Life. Chaucer came in withe yᵉ Conqueror, as
appears from the Roll of Battle-Abbey. Some think his
Father was a Merchant, but yᵗ is uncertain. ’Tis however
certain that his Parents were wealthy, otherwise they could
not have given their son such Education as to render him fit
for the Court, & to qualify for Business of State abroad. He
was educated both at Oxford and Cambridge.
May 12 (Th.).   .......
[p. 198] Troilus and Creseida of Chaucer MS. in Bibl. Bodl. Seld.
supra 56. written anno Dni. 1441, anno Regni H. VI. 19. —
MS. Fairfax 16. contains several Poetical Pieces. Some
bear Chaucer’s Name, others have no Name, but I conjecture
that they were however written by him, tho’ not amongst his
printed Pieces.
[p. 199] May 18 (Wed.). Leland saith that Chaucer was nobili loco
natus, & summæ  spei juvenis. —William Botevil alias Thinne
Esqʳ. publish’d Chaucer & dedicated it to K. Hen. VIII.
anno 1540. After yᵗ in 1560 John Stow corrected the same
with divers MSS., and added several Pieces not printed
before. Afterwards in 1597 he added to it several Pieces of
Lidgate, and drew up an Account of Chaucer’s Life, Prefer¬
ment, Issue & Death, collected out of Records in yᵉ Tower
& other Places, wᶜʰ he communicated to Thomas Spight
[sic] to be publish’d, wᶜʰ was accordingly performed. Stow’s
Annals Edit. fol. p. 326. —Thinne found the Editions before
his time of Chaucer very faulty, wᶜʰ he therefore corrected
according to MSS. See his Ded. to K. Hen. 8. His Edition was
printed at Lond. in 1540. by Thomas Bertholet [sic] as appears
from Leland. —Mr. Ashmole p. 227. of his Theatrum Chem.
Lond. 1652, 4ᵒ. has printed Geoff. Chaucer’s Tale of yᵉ
