
1700] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Dryden] 273
other Court. In the mean time, to follow the Thrid of my
Discourse (as Thoughts, according to Mr. Hobbs, have always
some Connexion,) so from Chaucer I was led to think on
Boccace, who was not only his Contemporary, but also pursu'd
the same Studies; wrote Novels in Prose, and many Works in
Verse; particularly is said to have invented the Octave Rhyme,
or Stanza of Eight Lines, which ever since has been maintain'd
by the Practice of all Italian Writers, who are, or at least
assume the title of Heroick Poets: He and Chaucer, among
other Things, had this in common, that they refin'd their
Mother-Tongues; but with this difference, that Dante had
begun to file their Language, at least in Verse, before the time
of Boccace, who likewise receiv’d no little Help from his Master
Petrarch: But the Reformation of their Prose was wholly
owing to Boccace himself; who is yet the Standard of Purity
in the Italian Tongue, though many of his Phrases are become
obsolete, as in process of Time it must needs happen. Chaucer
(as you have formerly been told by our learn’d Mr. Rhymer)
first adorn’d and amplified our barren Tongue from the
Provençall, which was then the most polish'd of all the
Modern Languages : But this Subject has been copiously treated
by that great Critick, who deserves no little Commendation
from us his Countrymen. For these Reasons of Time, and
Resemblance of Genius, in Chaucer and Boccace, I resolv'd to
join them in my present Work; to which I have added some
Original Papers of my own; which whether they are equal or
inferiour to my other Poems, an Author is the most improper
Judge; and therefore I leave them wholly to the Mercy of the
Reader: I will hope the best, that they will not be con¬
demn'd; but if they should, I have the Excuse of an old
Gentleman, who, mounting on Horseback before some Ladies,
when I was present, got up somewhat heavily, but desir'd of
the Fair Spectators, that they would count Fourscore and
eight before they judg’d him....
[sign. *B1] I proceed to Ovid, and Chaucer; considering the former
only in relation to the latter. With Ovid ended the Golden
Age of the Roman Tongue: From Chaucer the Purity of the
English Tongue began. The Manners of the Poets were not
unlike: Both of them were well-bred, well-natur'd, amorous,
and Libertine, at least in their Writings, it may be, also in their
Lives. Their Studies were the same, Philosophy, and Philology.
Both of them were knowing in Astronomy; of which Ovid’s
CHAUCER CRITICISM.
