
1706]   Chaucer Criticism and Allusion.   293
pariter pertinet opus Junii manu scriptum, & Jun. 6. sig-
natum, in quo omnes obsoletœ apud Chaucerum voces collectœ
sunt, prœter illas quœ incipiunt à littera A, quœ desiderantur.
[Cf. a. 1677, Junius, above, p. 253.]
1706. Harrison, William. Woodstock Park, a Poem, [in] A Collection
of Poems by several hands, ed. R. Dodsley, 1758, vol. v, pp.
192-3.
Goddess, proceed; and as to relicks found
Altars we raise, and consecrate the ground,
Pay thou thy homage to an aged seat,
Small in itself, but in its owner great;
Where Chaucer (sacred name!) whole years employ'd
Coy Nature courted, & at length enjoy'd;
Mov'd at his suit, the naked goddess came,
Reveal'd her charms, & recompens'd his flame.
Rome's pious king with like success retir'd,
And taught his people, what his Nymph inspir'd.
Hence flow descriptions regularly fine,
And beauties such as never can decline:
Each lively image makes the reader start,
And poetry invades the painter's art.
This Dryden saw, and with his wonted fate
(Rich in himself) endeavour'd to translate;
Took wond'rous pains to do the author wrong,
And set to modern time his ancient song.
Cadence, and sound, which we so prize, and use,
Ill suit the majesty of Chaucer's Muse;
His language only can his thoughts express,
Old honest Clytus scorns the Persian dress.
Inimitable bard!
In raptures loud I would thy praises tell,
And on th' inspiring theme for ever dwell.
[A copy of Harrison's poem is in the Bodleian (Gough, Oxford, 103). The title runs :
Woodstock Park, a poem, by William Harison [sic], of New College. Oxon, 1706. See
D.N.B.]
1706. Unknown. The British Warrior, a poem addressed to Lord
Cutts, Oct. 30, 1706.
[The beginning of this poem is written by J. Haslewood in his interleaved copy of
Winstanley's Lives of the Poets, to face p. 23. See below, c. 1833.]
The British muse in Chaucer first began,
All nature list'ning to the wondrous Man,
Our rugged youth upon his accents hung,
And melted at the musick of his song;
