
1709]  Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Hearne] 307
of his Books, that you found printed in an Edition of his
Poëms with Mr. Tanner, which you have not seen in any
other, I must, withall, acquaint you, that I have found the
[p. 602] same Revocation in a¹ MS. in the Bodleian Library, which
because it is fuller than that you mention, and somewhat
different, I shall transcribe at large. How prey I to hem
all, that herken this litul tretise or reden, that if ther be
any thing in it, that liketh hem, that thereof thei thanken
our Lorde Ihesu Crist, of whom procedeth alle witte and
all goodenesse. And if there be anything, that displese
hem, I prey hem also, that thei arrecte it to the defante of
myn unkonnyng, and not to my will, that wold fayne habe
seid better, if I hadde konnyng: for our boke seith, that
al that is written for oure doctrine, & that is myn entent.
... [Here the whole passage is given which is printed at the
end of the Persones Tale, ll. 1082-92.]
This Passage immediately follows these words, And the
rest by trabaile and the life by deth and mortification of
[p. 603] Syn, and is so continued with the Tale, as if it were part of
it; but tho’ this Revocation be also extant in the above men¬
tion’d MS. of Mr. Selden, yet it is written as distinct from the
Tales, which conclude with that of the Parson. For thus
it is brought in, Here enden the Talis of Caunturbury, and
next thautour taketh leue. — How preye I to hem alle &c.
So that it begins just as that which I have transcrib’d
above; but however is much shorter, ending with the Booke
of Seint Valenty.
Besides the Tracts said in this Revocation to have been
written by Chaucer, and the Difference of
§ 5. This Revo¬
cation seems not
the three Copies, viz. our two, and that in
genuine, but to
Mr. Tanner’s Book, we may observe, that
have been added
by the Monks.
the Scribe has intit’led himself to a share in
the Petition: whence I begin to think,
that the Revocation is not genuine, but that it was made
by the Monks. For not only the Regular, but Secular,
Clergy were exasperated against Chaucer, for the Freedom he
had taken to expose their Lewdness and Debauchery; but
nothing gave them so much offense, as the Plowman’s Tale,
in which he has, in lively Colours, describ’d their Pride,
Covetousness, and abominable Lusts, and shew’d that the
¹ Inter Codd.  Caroli Hattoni, num. 1.
