
354 [Urry] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1721
of Thomas Hearne, Mar. 17, 1714-15, pp. 331-2 above, and also the whole entry in
Remarks and Collections of Thomas Hearne, Oxford Hist. Soc., vol. v, ed. D.W.
Rannie, 1901, pp. 33-6. See also the account of Urry’s will given by Hearne, May 13,
1715, ibid., p. 58, also pp. 72 and 105.
For further information about Urry and the production of this edition, see
Literary Anecdotes of the 18th century, by John Nichols, 1812, vol. i, pp. 196-9,
where he says, amongst much else, "About the latter end of the year 1711, it was
proposed to Mr. Urry, who was a native of Scotland, by some persons well acquainted
with his qualifications (who he thought, had a right to command him) to put out
a new edition of Chaucer; which he was persuaded to undertake, though much
against his inclinations. This recommendation was, probably, from Dean Aldrich,
who well knew the talents of his pupil." Then follows a full account of the produc¬
tion of the book, Urry's application for a patent, his death, and epitaph, his character,
the Agreement for the printing of Chaucer (see under 1715), the Proposals (see under
1716), and the Glossary; also a reference to the copy of Urry's Chaucer annotated
by T. Thomas, then in the possession of Mr. A. Chalmers (now in the British
Museum, see below), in which Thomas says that Bishop Atterbury was the chief
person who proposed to Urry to undertake an edition of Chaucer. Mr. Thomas
adds, that the Bishop (then Dean of Christ-Church) "did by no means judge rightly
of Mr. Urry’s talents in this case; who, though in many respects a most worthy
person, was not qualifled for a work of this nature." See also Tyrwhitt, in his
Appendix to the Preface to the Canterbury Tales, vol. i, 1776, pp. xix, xx and note.
"I shall say but little of that [Urry's] edition, as a very fair and full account of
it is to be seen in the modest and sensible Preface prefxed to it by Mr. Timothy
Thomas, upon whom the charge of publishing Chaucer devolved, or rather was
imposed, after Mr. Urry's death. The strange licence, in which Mr. Urry appears
to have indulged himself, of lengthening and shortening Chaucer's words according
to his own fancy, and of even adding words of his own, without giving his readers
the least notice, has made the text of Chaucer in his Edition by far the worst that
was ever published."
Tyrwhitt adds, in a footnote to p. xx, that he learns Timothy Thomas wrote the
preface "from a MS. note in an interleaved copy of Urry's Chaucer, presented to
the British Museum by Mr. William Thomas, a brother, as I apprehend, of Mr. T.
Thomas. T. Thomas was of Christ-Church, Oxford, and died in 1757, aged LIX.
... Mr. W. Thomas has taken a great deal of unnecessary pains in collating that
copy of Urry's Edit. with several MSS. The best part of the various readings
serves only to correct the arbitrary innovations, which Mr. Urry had introduced into
the text. He has employed himself to better purpose upon the Glossary, where he
has made many emendations and additions, which may be of considerable use, if ever
a new Glossary to Chaucer shall be compiled." In Tyrwhitt's Advertisement to his
Chaucer Glossary, published 1778, vol. v. of the Canterbury Tales, p. ii, he acknow¬
ledges his debt to T. Thomas, saying he has "built upon his foundations, and often
with his materials."]
CONTENTS: [To face title page, engraved portrait of Urry.]
[Title page, as above, with engraved picture of Chaucer's
tomb.]
[An engraved oval portrait of Chaucer, written above
"Geoffrey Chaucer, our Antient & Learned English Poet,
died 1400, Æta. 72.", and underneath:
”Anglia Chaucerum veneratur nostra Poetam,
Cui veneres debet patria lingua suas.”
Tho. Occleve Contemporar. & discipulus ejusdem Chauceriad
viv. delin. Geo. Vertue sculp. 1717.]
[sign. a-f2] The Life of Geoffrey Chaucer. [By Dart, corrected by
W. Thomas, see below, pp. 358-61.]
