
1748] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 395
and assert that I wrote English, because it was English in
their days; but I should be a most affected puppy if I did
so, and you would not understand three words of my letter.
[In a letter dated Mar. 2, 1752-53, apropos of reading, Lord Chesterfleld says:"A
gentleman should know those which I call classical works, in every language; such
as Boileau, Corneille, Racine, Molière, &c., in French; Milton, Dryden, Pope, Swift,
&c., in English, and Boccacio, Tasso, and Ariosto in Italian." This is of interest
as mentioning no writer earlier than Milton as an English classic.]
1748. Unknown. Biographia Britannica, vol. ii, pp. 1026 [account of
W. Bullein, Dialogue, see above, 1564, p. 98], 1229, 1240-1, 1245-6
[Caxton], 1293-1308 [a long article on Chaucer]. For later
volumes see below, App. A., 1757 and 1760.
CHAUCER (Geoffrey) the Father of our English Poets, and
the first great improver and reformer of our language...
as he justly obtained the highest admiration amongst his
contemporaries, so his memory has ever since been highly
honoured. [Here follow the events of his life in great detail,
and a statement of the difficulties of getting at the facts about
it. Sprat, Pits, Leyland, Speght, Dart, Hearne, Ashmole,
Bale, and others are quoted.]...
[p. 1305] If we look upon him as an author, he may truly be
stiled the Father of English Poetry, and perhaps the Prince
of it, for except the unavoidable defects of language, his
Works have still all the beauties that can be wished for
or expected, in every kind of composition. He was not
unacquainted with the antient rules of Poetry, nor was he
incapable of writing up to them, as very clearly appears by
the Knight's Tale, which, as Mr. Dryden very justly says,
is a finished Epick Poem, but he did not always judge this
exactness necessary.   . . .
[p. 1307] We are not however to suppose, that with all these great
qualifications ['true genius, extensive learning, and a free
spirit'], Chaucer could entirely escape the fang of false
criticks... Those who have attacked Chaucer have not
presumed to question his wit, for of this perhaps no writer of
our nation ever had more, neither have they disputed his
poetical abilities, which certainly set his on a level with the
greatest names in antiquity; nor have they dared to throw
any aspersion on his learning, the extent of which is not
greater than the masterly degree of propriety with which it is
everywhere applied : but the point to which they object, is, his
changing, debasing, or corrupting our language, by introducing
