
366 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1723-
of Men who have been always remark'd for a distinguishing
Taste: A Life, which I have been told by no mean Judges,
has not displeas’d. This I here mention to vindicate my self
from those Mistakes of which I am not guilty; and this
indeed was the chief Motive to my Conclusion of a Poem
upon this Man and his Works, with which I shall likewise
close this Account of his Tomb.
Industrious thus to do my Master right,
And save his Actions Time — conceal’d from Night;
Long on the dusty Roll and mould’ring File,
I urg'd the intricate laborious Toil;
Toil ill return'd by this ungenerous Age,
Unthank'd the Labour, and defac'd the Page.
[p. 89]
Yet not discouraged thus, with grateful Fire,
I try at Verse, and reassume the Lyre:
Suspend, great Bard, this Tablet at thy Shrine,
And bribe the World to Fame, by sounding thine.
[There is no copy of the 1st edn. at the B. M. ; Westminster Abbey, a Poem, is
prefixed to the edn. of 1742 (see above, 1721, Dart, J., p. 361). The "Poem on
Chaucer and his Writings, 1722," is not in the B. M. or Bodl., nor have we been able
to trace it. The edn. of 1742 contains also a full-page engraving of Chaucer’s
monument.]
1723. Pope, Alexander. Letter [to Mrs. Judith Cowper], September 26,
1723 [in] Letters of the late Alexander Pope, Esq. to a Lady.
Never before Published. Printed for J. Dodsley, 1769, Letter xii,
pp. 79, 80-82. (Works, 1871, vol. ix, pp. 431-32, and see also
ibid. p. 430.)
[p. 80] I could wish you tried something in the descriptive way on
any subject you please, mixed with vision and moral; like
pieces of the old provençal poets, which abound with fancy,
and are the most amusing scenes in nature. There are
three or four of this kind in Chaucer's admirable: ‘the
Flower and the Leaf’ every body has been delighted with.
[p. 81]... I think, one or two of the Persian tales would give one
hints for such an invention [a fairy tale]: and perhaps if the
scenes were taken from real places that are known, in order
to compliment particular gardens and buildings of a fine taste
[p. 82] (as I believe several of Chaucer descriptions do, though it is
what nobody has observed), it would add great beauty to the
whole.
1724. [Defoe, Daniel.] The Fortunate Mistress (Roxana), p. 359.
That foolish young girl held us all in a Canterbury story;
I thought she would never have done with it.
