
380 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1737
The courtiers indeed, at this time [the reign of Edward III]
were disposed to buzz many thing[s] in the king’s ear, that were
prejudicial to the Church; in which they were encouraged by
a flattering divine called John Wickliff, and the witty satires
of sir Geoffrey Chaucer, who took all occasions to lessen the
power of churchmen, and ridicule their character... As for
sir Geoffrey Chaucer, he was, according to the stile of those
days, esteemed an excellent poet, and being infected by
Wickliff, could not fail of being acceptable to the libertines of
the court.
[p. 369] Nicholas Brigham... having a natural genius for poetry,
he sported away some of his youthful hours in that way; but
quickly laying that passion asleep, he followed the more useful
studies of law and history. However, the regard he had for
poetry, and particularly for sir Geoffrey Chaucer's memory,
engaged him to be at the expense of beautifying the monu¬
ment of that celebrated person, in the year 1556, and removing
it to a more conspicuous place, in Westminster church, as we
now find it.
[See above, 1556, p. 94.]
1737. Lewis, John. Life of Mayster Wyllyam Caxton. p. xix. (Testi¬
monies concerning Wylliam Caxton. Joannes Pits. 1600, see below,
App. A); pp. 60, 80-1, 92, 102-8, 114, 122-4.
[p. 60] ... Now it was but an hundred and twenty four Years
since that Translation [Trevisa's of the Polychronicon] was
made; whereas Archbishop Parker noted it as very strange,
that our Language should be so changed in four hundred
Years from his time, the Manuscript Book of the Lives of the
Saints, written about A.D. 1200, in old English Verse, now
in Bennet College Library, was so written, that People could
not understand it. This seems owing to the generous
Endeavours of those two great Genius's, Chaucer and Gower,
to polish and improve their Mother-tongue.
[pp. 80-1] He [John Gower] was an intimate Friend and Acquaintance
of that eminent Poet Geoffery Chaucer, as he shews in this Book,
[Confessio Amantis] and used to submit his Lucrubrations [sic]
to his Judgment, as Chaucer did his Loves of Troilus, to the
Censure and Correction of Gower and Strode.
[p. 122] Of all our English Writers, Mʳ. Caxton most admired our
Poet Geoffrey Chaucer. "In all his works, he sayd, he
excelled, in his opinion, all other writers in our English."
