
280 [Dryden] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1700
what need they had of introducing such Characters, when
obscene Words were proper in their Mouths, but very undecent
to be heard; I know not what Answer they could have made:
For that Reason, such Tales shall be left untold by me. You
have here a Specimen of Chaucer's Language, which is so
obsolete, that his Sense is scarce to be understood; and you
have likewise more than one Example of his unequal Numbers,
which were mention'd before. Yet many of his Verses consist
of Ten Syllables, and the Words not much behind our present
English : as for Example, these two Lines, in the Description of
the Carpenter's Young Wife:
Wincing she was, as is a jolly Colt,
Long as a Mast, and upright as a Bolt.
I have almost done with Chaucer, when I have answer'd some
Objections relating to my present Work. I find some People
are offended that I have turn'd these Tales into modern
English; because they think them unworthy of my Pains,
and look on Chaucer as a dry, old-fashion'd Wit, not worth
receiving [edn. of 1723 'reviving']. I have often heard the
late Earl of Leicester say, that Mr. Cowley himself was of that
opinion; who, having read him over at my Lord’s Request,
declared he had no Taste of him. I dare not advance my
Opinion against the Judgment of so great an Author: But I
think it fair, however, to leave the Decision to the Publick.
Mr. Cowley, was too modest to set up for a Dictatour; and,
being shock’d perhaps with his old Style, never examin'd
into the depth of his good Sense. Chaucer, I confess, is
a rough Diamond, and must first be polish’d, e’er he shines.
I deny not likewise, that, living in our early Days of Poetry,
he writes not always of a piece; but sometimes mingles
trivial Things with those of greater Moment. Sometimes also,
though not often, he runs riot, like Ovid, and knows not
when he has said enough. But there are more great Wits
besides Chaucer, whose Fault is their Excess of Conceits, and
those ill sorted. An Author is not to write all he can, but
only all he ought. Having observ’d this Redundancy in
Chaucer, (as it is an easie Matter for a Man of ordinary
Parts to find a Fault in one of greater,) I have not ty'd
my self to a Literal Translation; but have often omitted what
I judg'd unnecessary, or not of Dignity enough to appear in
the Company of better Thoughts. I have presum'd farther
in some Places, and added somewhat of my own where I
