
1700] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Dryden] 279
only. Some of his Persons are Vicious, and some Virtuous;
some are unlearn’d, or (as Chaucer calls them) Lewd, and
some are Learn'd. Even the Ribaldry of the Low Characters
is different : the Reeve, the Miller, and the Cook, are several
Men, and are distinguish'd from each other, as much as the
mincing Lady-Prioress, and the broad-speaking, gap-toothed
Wife of Bathe. But enough of this: There is such a Variety
of Game springing up before me, that I am distracted in my
Choice, and know not which to follow. 'Tis sufficient to say
according to the Proverb, that here is God’s Plenty. We have
our Fore-fathers and Great Grand-dames all before us, as they
were in Chaucer's Days; their general Characters are still
remaining in Mankind, and even in England, though they are
call’d by other Names than those of Moncks, and Fryars, and
Chanons and Lady Abbesses, and Nuns: For Mankind is ever
the same, and nothing lost out of Nature, though everything
is alter'd. May I have leave to do myself the Justice, (since
my Enemies will do me none, and are so far from granting me
to be a good Poet, that they will not allow me so much as to
be a Christian, or a Moral Man), may I have leave, I say, to
inform my Reader, that I have confined my Choice to such
Tales of Chaucer as savour nothing of Immodesty. If I desir'd
more to please than to instruct, the Reve, the Miller, the
Shipman, the Merchant, the Sumner, and above all, the Wife
of Bathe, in the Prologue to her Tale, would have procur'd me
as many Friends and Readers, as there are Beaux and Ladies
of Pleasure in the Town. But I will no more offend against
Good Manners: I am sensible as I ought to be of the Scandal
I have given by my loose Writings; and make what Reparation
I am able, by this Public Acknowledgment. If anything of
this Nature, or of Profaneness, be crept into these Poems, I
am so far from defending it, that I disown it. Totum hoc
indictum volo. Chaucer makes another manner of Apologie for
his broad speaking, and Boccace makes the like; but I will
follow neither of them. Our Country-man, in the end of his
Characters, before the Canterbury Tales, thus excuses the
Ribaldry, which is very gross in many of his Novels.
But firste, I pray you of your courtesy,
That ye ne arrete it nought my villany,
Though that I plainly speak in this mattere, [etc.].
[quotes 11. 725-42 of Prologue.]
[sign. *C2] Yet if a Man should have enquir'd of Boccace or of Chaucer,
