
358 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1721
Transcribers, or Negligence of Printers, he made no scruple to
supply it with some Word or Syllable that serv’d for an
Expletive": But I find at the same time that he had once a
design of enclosing such words in hooks thus[ ] to distinguish
them from what he found justified by the authority of MSS.,
but how it came to pass that so just, useful and necessary
a Design was not executed, I cannot satisfy the curious
Reader.  ...
[Then follows a complete list and description of the various
MSS. and the printed editions of Chaucer consulted.]
[For some account of T. Thomas, and appreciation of his work, see Tyrwhitt's
Preface to the Canterbury Tales, vol. i, 1775, p. xx and note, also Advertisement to
Glossary, vol. v, 1778, p. ii, partially reprinted here in the note to Urry's edition,
p. 354 above.]
1721. Dart, John. Life of Geoffrey Chaucer, prefixed to Urry's edition of
Chaucer's Works, 1721, [q. v.], sign. a 1-f. 2.
[sign. b 2] Thus beloved, esteemed and honoured, he spent his younger
years in a constant attendance upon the Court, and for the
most part living near it, when residing at Woodstock, in a
square stone house near the Park Gate, still called Chaucer's
House, That this was the chief place of his abode, appears by
his frequent descriptions of the Park; as particularly a Park
walled with green stone (note Bl. Kn. 42), that being the first
Park walled in England, and not many years before his time.
In most of his pieces, where he designs an imaginary Scene,
he certainly copies it from a real Landskape : So in his Cuckow
and Nightingale, the Morning walk he takes was such as at
this day may be traced from his House through part of the
Park, and down by the Brook into the Vale under Blenheim
Castle, as certainly as we may assert that Maples in stead of
Phylireas, were the ornaments round the Bower; which place
he likewise describes in his Dream, as a white Castle standing
upon a hill; the Scene in that Poem being laid in Woodstock
Park.  ...
[sign. e 2b] When disengaged from publick Affairs, his time was
entirely spent in study and reading: So agreeable to him
was this exercise, that he says, he preferred it to all other
sports and diversions. He lived within himself, neither
desirous to hear nor busy to concern himself with the affairs
of his Neighbours. His course of living was temperate and
regular; he went to rest with the Sun, and rose before it, and
by that means enjoyed the pleasures of the better part of the
