
302 [Hearne]  Five Hundred Years of  [A.D. 1709
Pride, Loosness and Debauchery.   ... Pitts
mentions among Chaucer’s Works Oratoris (read aratoris)
narratio, wᶜʰ he takes to be the same with Pierce Plow-man,
and tells us ’tis exstant in MS.ᵗ at Oxon.  and Cambridge.
He also mentions Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales, with his
Retractation, as being in MS. in the Lord Lumley’s Library.
[p. 201] May 24 (Tu.). It appeareth from yᵉ Testament of Love
that G. Chaucer was in some Trouble in the days of Rich.
2ᵈ. where he complains very much of his own Rashness in
[p. 202] following the multitude, & of their hatred against him for
bewraying their Purpose. And in that complaint wᶜʰ he makes
to his empty purse Mʳ. Speght found ten times more adjoyned
in a MS.ᵗ of it in Mr. Stowes hands than is in the Print,
making therein great Lamentation for his wrongfull Imprison¬
ment, wishing Death to end his Dayes. And ’tis plain from
a Record in yᵉ Tower that the King took Geff. Chaucer & his
Lands into his Protection in yᵉ 2ᵈ. year of his Reign, because
there was much Danger from him by reason of his favouring
some rash attempt of the common People. —Some of his
Canterbury Tales were translated and penned in the Days of
Rich. 2ᵈ., after the insurrection of Jck Straw, wᶜʰ was in
the 4th year of yᵗ King’s Reign, & whereof Chaucer maketh
Mnetion in the Tale of the Nunne’sv Prest.
[1709.] Hearne, Thomas. A Letter to Mr. Bagford, containing some
Remarks upon Geffry Chaucer and his Writings [in] Robert of
Gloucester’s Chronicle, ed. Thomas Hearne, 1724, vol. ii, Appendix
iv, pp. 596-606.
Sir,
§1. A laudable
I cannot but highly commend your In¬
Undertaking, to
dustry, in being so inquisitive into the Life
endeavour to give
an Account of the
and Writings of Geffry Chaucer, the Prince
Life and Writings
of our English Poëts; and I am extremely
of Geffry Chaucer.
oblig’d to you, for the Account you sent me
of the Editions of him, that you have hitherto met with.
Would others but imitate your Diligence, we should under¬
stand this excellent Poët much better than we do, and be
able to give a far more correct Edition of him than has hither¬
to appear’d. Such an Undertaking will derive great Honour
upon those, that shall ingage in it, and will be gratefully
receiv’d by all true Scholars and Antiquaries. For Chaucer
was not only an excellent Poët, but was admirably well
