
1700] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Dryden] 283
this time translating Chaucer into modern French. From which
I gather, that he has been formerly translated into the old
Provençall; (for, how she should come to understand Old Eng¬
lish, I know not). But the Matter of Fact being true, it makes
me think that there is something in it like Fatality; that, after
certain Periods of Time, the Fame and Memory of Great Wits
should be renew’d, as Chaucer is both in France and England.
If this be wholly Chance, 'tis extraordinary; and I dare not
call it more, for fear of being tax'd with Superstition.
Boccace comes last to be consider'd, who, living in the
same Age with Chaucer, had the same Genius, and followed
the same Studies: Both writ Novels, and each of them culti¬
vated his Mother-Tongue: But the greatest Resemblance of
our two Modern Authors being in their familiar Style, and
pleasing way of relating Comical Adventures, I may pass it
over, because I have translated nothing from Boccace of that
Nature. In the serious part of Poetry, the Advantage is wholly
on Chaucer's Side; for though the Englishman has borrow'd
many Tales from the Italian, yet it Appears, that those of Boccace
were not generally of his own making, but taken from Authors
of former ages, and by him only modell’d: So that what there
was of Invention, in either of them, may be judg'd equal.
But Chaucer has refin'd on Boccace, and has mended the
Stories, which he has borrow’d, in his way of telling; though
Prose allows more Liberty of Thought, and the Expression is
more easie, when unconfin'd by Numbers. Our Countryman
carries Weight, and yet wins the Race at disadvantage. I
desire not the Reader should take my Word; and, therefore, I
[sign.
*D1b]
will set two of their Discourses, on the same Subject, in the
same Light, for every Man to judge betwixt them. I trans¬
lated Chaucer first, and amongst the rest, pitch'd on The Wife
of Bath's Tale; not daring, as I have said, to advance on her
Prologue, because 'tis too licentious: There Chaucer intro¬
duces an old Woman of mean Parentage, whom a youthful
Knight of Noble Blood, was forc’d to marry, and consequently
loath'd her: The Crone being in bed with him on the
wedding Night, and finding his Aversion, endeavours to win
his Affection by Reason, and speaks a good Word for herself,
(as who could blame her?) in hope to mollifie the sullen Bride¬
groom. She takes her Topiques from the Benefits of Poverty,
the Advantages of old Age and Ugliness, the Vanity of Youth,
and the silly Pride of Ancestry and Titles, without inherent
