
352 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1720-
have said more, and that more pathetically than any of his
Imitators. It is taken from the First Book of Troilus and
Cresseide; and the Reader by a Comparison may see how
little Variation there is from the Original, and give his
Judgment at Pleasure. I only wish that so excellent a Poet
as Chaucer may be no longer admir'd at a Distance, but
brought into the Acquaintance of the Polite World; and it
it is to be hoped the New Edition of his Works [Urry's
Chaucer, 1721] will compleat that Wish.
1720. Strype, John. A Survey of the Cities of London and Westminster:
... Written at first in the Year MDXCVIII. By John Stow. ...
Since Reprinted and Augmented by the Author; And afterwards
by A. M., H. D. and others. Now Lastly, Corrected, Improved,
and very much Enlarged: ... By John Strype, M.A.  ... The
Second Volume.   ... London.  ... MDCCXX.  ...
A Survey of the City of Westminster. Book VI. ... The
Monastry of St. PETER, 31.
In the South Ile.
Galfridus Chaucer, Poêta celeberrimus, qui
He Iyeth
buried in the
primus Anglicam Poêsin ita illustravit, ut Anglicus
South Part
Homerus habeatur. Obiit 1400. Anno vero
of the
Church.
1555. Nicholaus Brigham, Musarum nomine
hujus ossa transtulit, & illi novum tumulum ex
marmore, his versibus inscriptis posuit:
Qui fuit Anglorum Vates ter maximus olim,
Galfridus Chaucer, conditur hoc tumulo.
Annum si quœras Domini, si tempora mortis,
Ecce notœ subsunt, quæ  tibi cuncta notant.
25 Octobris, 1400.
[This epitaph is not in the edition of 1598; in the enlarged sixth edition of 1755,
it is in vol. ii, p. 604, col. 2.]
1720. Theobald, [Lewis]. Preface to The Tragedy of King Richard
the II.  ... altered from Shakespear, By Mr. Theobald, 1720,
sign. Aa 4 b, Bb 1.
Our late Laureat [Dryden], and some Others before him,
have seem’d to be of Opinion that our Poet [Shakespeare] took
his Troilus and Cressida from Lollius and Chaucer, who borrow'd
his Argument from the Lombard. But the Incidents and
Characters of these Poems are so few, their Arguments so
narrow, and confin’d, in Comparison to that Scope which our
Poet takes, that I dare be positive he drew out his Scheme,
and modell’d it from Homer himself.
