
1739] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 385
letter of 1373 to Boccaccio about Grisild] to have seen at
Padua, may be taken for our very Chaucer.
This Tale [of Griselda]... has already pass’d thro' the
Hands of BOCCACE, PETRARCH and CHAUCER; that is, thro' the
Hands of three Men of as great Genius as ever appear’d in one
Age. BOCCACE may be suppos'd to have improv’d on Those He
follow'd; PETRARCH most certainly improv’d on Him; and
our Countryman undeniably improv’d on them Both. ...
[p. viii] I hold Mr. DRYDEN to have been the first Who put the Merit
of CHAUCER into its full and true Light, by Turning Some
of the Canterbury Tales into our Language, as it is now refin’d,
or rather as He himself refin'd it. ...
Treating of CHAUCER (Whom He puts on a Footing of
Comparison in some Instances with Ovid) He observes; that,
among other Excellencies, He was perfect Master of the
Manners....
[p. ix] As to the Point of Characterizing, at which CHAUCER was
most singularly happy; You can name no Author even of
Antiquity, whether in the Comic or in the Satiric Way, equal,
at least superior, to Him. Give Me Leave, only to throw
together a few Touches taken from his Descriptions of the
Pilgrims. [Here follow a large number of quotations in this
style]... The Squire; with Locks curl’d, just fresh from the
Press!. . . The Lady Prioress; Who wept if She saw a Mouse
taken in a Trap!... To conclude, the Doctor of Physic;
whose Study was little in the Bible! And the Serjeant at Law;
Who seemed much busier than he was! All these, I say, are
the Strokes of no common Genius, but of a Man perfectly
conversant in the Turns and Foibles of human Nature.
Observe but his Manner of Throwing Them in, and You will
not think I exaggerate, it I say, these Turns of Satire, are not
unworthy of PERSIUS, JUVENAL, or HORACE himself. Before I
cool upon this Subject, I shall venture (as far as the Ludicrous
may hold Comparison with the Serious) to rank our CHAUCER
with whatever We have of greatest Perfection in this Character
of Painting; I shall venture to Rank Him (making this
Allowance) either with SALUST [sic] or CLARENDON....
[p. x] For it was not to the Distinguishing of Character from
Character, that the Excellence of CHaucer was confin'd; He
was equally Master of Introducing them properly on the
Stage; and after having introduced them, of Supporting them
agreeably to the Part They were formed to personate. In This,
CHAUCER CRITICISM.
CC
