
1701] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 289
1700. Wesley, Samuel. An Epistle to a Friend Concerning Poetry.
London. Printed for Charles Harper at the Flower de Luce in
Fleetstreet, MDCC, p. 12.
Of CHAUCER'S Verse we scarce the Measures know,
So rough the Lines, and so unequal flow;
Whether by Injury of Time defac'd,
Or careless at the first, and writ in haste;
Or coursly, like old Ennius, he design’d
What After-days have polish’d and refin'd.
1701. Collier, Jeremy. The Great Historical, Geographical, Genea¬
logical, and Poetical Dictionary.... [chiefly] collected from
... Lewis Morery his Eighth Edition. The Second Edition,
Revis’d, Corrected and enlarged to the Year 1688, vol. i, sign
B.b.b.2. [Life of] Jeffrey Chaucer.
CHAUCER (Jeffrey), born at Woodstock in Oxfordshire, in
the Fourteenth Century. He was called The English Homer,
and was not only a Poet but a Mathematician, and under¬
stood, according to the Talent of his Time, the Polite Part of
Learning. He died in 1440, and has a Tomb in Westminster¬
Abby. His Works are Printed in Folio, at London in 1561.
Besides these, he left a Manuscript, in which he Laments the
Liberties he had taken in some Part of his Poems, incon¬
sistent with Modesty and Religion. This Manuscript is now
in the Hands of the Reviser.
[Authorities] Leland, Bale, Cambden.
1701. Le Neve, Peter. Letter to Sir John Perceval, [printed in]
Report on the Manuscripts of the Earl of Egmont, vol. ii (Hist.
MSS. Comm.), 1909, p. 198.
This I am sure of, that at Henham Hall and Park by the
road side, the lovers of antiquity will find occasion of con¬
templation, when they recollect that the famous Charles
Brandon, Duke of Suffolk, in Henry VIII's time lived here;
and before him the family of Kederston, whose estate devolved
by heirs female to Thomas Chaucer, Esq., a descendant of the
famous poet of that name...
1701. Unknown. Chaucer's Whims: Being some select Fables and
Tales in Verse, very applicable to the Present Times. [See specially
the] Preface.
If I have not done Justice to Chaucer by putting his
Name to Fables and Stories which are Collected by another
Hand; I have several Precedents to excuse me....
CHAUCER CRITICISM.
