
1737] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 379
whether  'tis in the same Vagrant Condition still; or whether
the Fame of our most admir'd Moderns, is not almost as
precarious, as that of their now obsolete Predecessors has
prov'd to be; agreable to that Line in the celebrated Essay on
Criticism,
And what now Chaucer is, shall Dryden be.
[p. xi] Chaucer, not the next Writer, [to Langland] tho' the next
. . . . . . . . . . .
[See above, 1709, pp. 310-11, and pp. 315, 367, 369, and below, p. 383.]
extraordinary Genius, encountered the Follies of Mankind, as
well as their Vices, and blended the acutest Raillery, with
the most insinuating Humour. By his Writings, it plainly
appears that Poetry, and Politeness grew up together; and had
like to have been bury’d in his Grave. ...
. . . . . . . . . . .
[p. xii] ’Tis certain, very Few of these great Men are generally
known to the present Age: And tho' Chaucer, and Spencer
are ever nam’d with much Respect, not many are intimately
acquainted with their Beauties.
[p. 23]
Chaucer, The Morning-Star of the English Poetry!..
[short account of his life]. All agree he was the first Master
of his Art among us, and that the Language, in general, is
much oblig'd to him for Copiousness, Strength and Ornament.
It would be endless, almost, to enumerate the Compliments
that have been paid to his Merit, by the Gratitude of those
Writers, who have enrich’d themselves so much by his
inestimable Legacies.—But his own Works, are his best
Monument. In those appear a real Genius, as capable of
inventing, as improving; equally suited to the Gay, and the
Sublime; soaring in high Life, and pleasant in low:...
[p. 24] Ever both entertaining, and instructive! All which is so well
known, ’tis, in a Manner, needless to repeat:... it is not a
little difficult to chuse one [a quotation] that will do him
Justice: Most of his principal Tales have been already
exhausted by the Moderns, and consequently, neither of them
would appear to Advantage in their antiquated, original
Dress... [The Pardoner’s Prologue is then given.]
[p. 31]
[Occleve] To his Care and Affection is owing the Original
of that Print, which is now so common of Chaucer.
1737. Dodd, Charles. The Church History of England from the
year 1500 to the year 1688. Brussels. Printed in the year
MDCCXXXVII, vol. i, Book i, Art i, p. 61; Book ii, Art iii, p. 369.
