
1709]    Chaucer Criticism and Allusion.  [Hearne]  301
Chanon’s Yeoman, and before it he has added Chaucer’s
Picture and Epitaph from Westminster Abbey. Pitts says
Chaucer was born of Noble Parents, and that Patrem habuit
equestris ordinis virum, his Father was a Knight.—
The Plough-Man’s Tale. Shewing by yᵉ Doctrine and lives
of the Romish Clergie that the Pope is anti-christ and they
his ministers, written by sir Geffrey Chaucer, Knight, amongst
his Canterburie Tales: and now set apart from the rest, with
short exposition of the words & matters, for yᵉ capacitie and
understanding of yᵉ simpler sort of Readers. Lon. 1606,
printed by G. E. for Samuell Macham & Matthew Cooke. 4ᵒ.
S. 77, Art. Seld. There is no Preface, nor any Account of
yᵉ Publisher in this Copy. At yᵉ Beginning the Author of yᵉ
Notes (wᶜʰ are very good) says, ... [quotes from these: ＂In
the former Editions ... written near to Chawcer’s time.＂
See above, p. 177, Ploughman’s Tale, 1606]. The Title Page of
our Pynson’s Edition of Chaucer’s Tales, amongst Mr. Selden’s
MSS. is wanting, as is also the date. But there is the
Preface of Mʳ. Pynson. From yᵗ Preface it appears that he
printed these Tales according to a Copy prepared in due
Method by Mʳ. Wᵐ. Caxton, but I much doubt whether
Caxton ever printed all yᵉ Tales, & am of opinion that he
printed only some Pieces of his works, notwithstanding what
Stow and others say.
In the Bodl. Library is a Collection of old Romantick Pieces,
the first of wᶜʰ is The story of yᵉ Noble Kynge Richard Cure de
lyon, pr. at Lond. by Wynkyn de Worde an. 1528, without
[p. 200] yᵉ Author’s Name, but somebody has written at yᵉ Beginning
these words, By Jeffree Chawshed Pooet Laret. It is adorned
with wooden Cutts.  .......
John Shirley Esqr. lyes buried in St. Bartholomew’s Church,
Lond. He was a great Traveller in divers Countries, &
amongst other his Labours, painfully collected the works of
Geffrey Chawcer, John Lidgatex, and other learned writers; wᶜʰ
workes he wrote in sundry volumes, to remain for posterity:
Mʳ. Stow says he had seen them, and that he had some of
them in his Possession. See Survey of London, p. 416. He
died anno 1456.   .......
I believe the Revocation annex’d to the Parson’s Tale in
some Copies of Chaucer not to be genuine, but made by the
Monks, who were strangely exasperated for the Freedom he
took, especially in the Plow-man’s Tale of exposing their
