
272 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1700.
But Johnson found it of a gross Alloy,
Melted it down and flung the Scum away.
He dug pure Silver from a Roman Mine
And prest his Sacred Image on the Coyn.
[The 1710 edn. omits 'Of Gloriana, and her Knights he sung and the following
line, and reads 'Dross' for 'Scum' in the 3rd line from the bottom. In the Bodleian
Catalogue there is an edn. of Cobb's 'Poems on Several Occasions' printed in 1709.
Allibone and Watts mention a Collection of Poems 1707.]
1700. Dryden, [John]. Fables Ancient and Modern, Translated into
Verse from Homer, Ovid, Boccace & Chaucer : With Original Poems.
Preface, sign. *A 1 to *D 2 b. (Dryden’s works, ed. Sir W.
Scott, revised G. Saintsbury, 1882-93, vol. xi, 1885, Preface,
pp. 208-44; also Dryden's Essays, ed. W. P. Ker, 1900, vol. ii,
pp. 246-73.)
[sign. *A 1] ... Spencer and Fairfax both flourish’d in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth : Great Masters in our Language... Milton
was the Poetical Son of Spencer, and Mr. Waller of Fairfax;
for we have our Lineal Descents and Clans, as well as other
Families: Spencer more than once insinuates, that the Soul of
Chaucer was transfus'd into his Body; and that he was be¬
gotten by him Two Hundred years after his Decease. Milton
has acknowledg'd to me that Spencer was his Original;...
But to return: Having done with Ovid for this time, it came
into my mind, that our old English poet, Chaucer, in many
[sign.
*A 1 b]
Things resembled him, and that with no disadvantage on the
Side of the Modern Author, as I shall endeavour to prove when
I compare them: And as I am, and always have been studious
to promote the Honour of my Native Country, so I soon resolv'd
to put their Merits to the Trial, by turning some of the Canter¬
bury Tales into our Language, as it is now refin'd: For by this
Means, both the Poets being set in the same Light, and dress’d
in the same English habit, Story to be compared with Story, a
certain Judgment may be made betwixt them, by the Reader,
without obtruding my Opinion on him: Or if I seem partial to
my Country-man, and Predecessor in the Laurel, the Friends of
Antiquity are not few : And, besides many of the Learn’d, Ovid
has almost all the Beaux, and the whole Fair Sex his declar'd
Patrons. Perhaps I have assum’d somewhat more to my self
than they allow me; because I have adventur'd to sum up the
Evidence; but the Readers are the Jury; and their Privilege
remains entire to decide according to the Merits of the Cause:
Or, if they please, to bring it to another Hearing, before some
