
1721] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 353
1720. Unknown. Article on and reprint of the Cuckow and the Night¬
ingale, [in] The Free-Thinker, May 24 and May 27, 1720. Nos.
cexxvii & coxxviii.
I was not willing to let the present Month, the fairest in
the whole Circle of the Year, pass over, without entertaining
my youthful Readers of either Sex, with something suitable
to the Gayety of the Season. And yet, I should have been
greatly at a Loss for a proper Entertainment, had not a
Gentleman whose Knowledge of the Polite Writers in every
Language is the least of his Commendations, obliged me with
a Piece of fine Invention out of Chaucer, which is properly a
very elegant May-poem....
It is hard to say, whether the copiousness of Chaucer's
Invention, or the Liveliness of his Imagination, is most to
be admired throughout his Writings. He flourished above
Three Hundred Years ago: and yet through the Cloud of
his antiquated Language, his Images still shine out with
greater Brightness than those which appear in any of our
succeeding Poets, if we except Spencer, and Shakespear, and
Milton. He was a great Master of Perspicuity and Sim¬
plicity, in all his Narrations; and his Expression is always
precise to the Justness of his Ideas... Chaucer is, likewise,
a diligent observer of Nature, whether he deals in Realitie
or in Fables.
1721. The Works of Geoffrey Chaucer, compared with the Former
Editions and many valuable MSS. Out of which, Three
Tales are added which were never before Printed; By John
Urry, Student of Christ-Church, Oxon, Deceased: Together
with a Glossary, By a Student of the same College. To
the Whole is prefixed The Author’s Life, newly written,
and a Preface, giving an Account of this Edition. London,
Printed for Bernard Lintot, between the Temple Gates.
1721.
[This edition is, from the point ot view of the text, the worst ever issued. Urry
altered, respelt and even added words to Chaucer's text with the greatest freedom,
without giving any indication that he had done so–see Preface by Timothy Thomas.
Urry apparently did all the work of preparing the text for the press, and then died,
on March 18, 1714-15, before the prefaces, glossary &c. were written. The rights of
printing the edition were handed over by Urry to his executor Mr. Brome and the
Dean and Chapter of Christ-Church and Bernard Lintot, bookseller, and proposals
to print the book by subscription were issued in 1716 [q. v., p. 344]. It was not,
however, published till 1721, being then completed with Preface, Glossary, etc., by
Timothy Thomas, which were revised for press by William Thomas. (See below for
W. Thomas' annotated copy.) Urry included in this edition two spurious Tales,
which had never before been printed: viz. : The Coke’s Tale of Gamelyn, pp. 36-48,
and the Mery Adventure of the Pardonere and Tapstere and Tale of Beryn, one
piece, pp. 594-626. For an account of Urry, see extract here given from the diary
CHAUCER CRITICISM.
A A
