
314  Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1711
Both now are priz'd by few, unknown to most,
Because the Thoughts are in the Language lost;
Ev'n Spencer's Pearls in muddy Waters lye,
Rarely discover'd by the Diver's Eye:
Rich was their Imag’ry, till Time defac'd
The curious Works; but Waller came at last.
Waller the Muse with Heavenly Verse supplies...
[Quoted by Samuel Pegge (the Elder) in Anonymiana, 1778, pr. 1809, pp. 344-5,
see below, 1778, p. 451; and by Dr. George Sewell, in his Memoirs prefixed to the
Poems of Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, 1717, pp. XV-XVI, see below, 1717, p. 346.
In Chalmers the line "Rarely discover'd..."reads  "Yet soon their beams attract
the diver's eye."]
1711. Addison, Joseph. The Spectator for May 24, 1711, No. 73,
fol. 1b. (The Spectator, ed. G. Gregory Smith, 1897-8, vol. i,
p. 278.)
This Humour of an Idol is prettily described in a Tale of
Chaucer: He represents one of them sitting at a Table with
three of her Votaries about her, who are all of them courting
her Favour, and paying their Adorations: She smiled upon
one, drank to another, and trod upon the other's Foot which
was under the Table. Now which of these three, says the
old Bard, do you think was the Favourite. In troth, says he,
not one of all the three.
¶ The Behaviour of this old Idol in Chaucer puts me in
mind of the Beautiful Clarinda, one of the greatest Idols
among the Moderns.
[The reference is to the ‘ Remedy of Love,’ not by Chaucer, but first printed by
Thynne in the 1582 edn. of Chaucer's collected Works.]
[1711.] Dennis, John. Reflections, Critical and Satyrical, upon a late
Rhapsody call’d an Essay on Criticism, pp. 18-20.
In the 28th Page there are no less than two or three
Absurdities in the compass of four Lines:
Now length of Fame our second Life is lost,
And bare Threescore is all ev'n that can boast.
[p. 19]
Our Sons their Fathers failing Language see
And such as Chaucer is shall Dryden be.
. . . . . . . . . .
That is shall grow obsolete and neglected, and be either forgot
[p. 20] or be read by but a few. ... Mr. Dryden had one Quality
in his Language, which Chaucer had not, and which must
always remain. For having acquir'd some Justness of
Numbers and some Truth of Harmony and of Versification, to
which Chaucer thro' the Rudeness of the Language or want
of Ear, or want of Experience, or rather perhaps a mixture of
