
306 [Hearne]  Five Hundred Years of          [A.D. 1709
great many Places corrupted, that in other Places whole Verses
are wanting, which might by these Helps be supply’d, that
sometimes the Titles of the Tales are chang’d, and that, lastly,
intire Tracts might be added, that were never yet made publick.
I took more particular notice of one MS. there, ¹ which is a
Collection of Poëms, some whereof bear Chaucer’s name, and
others have no name at all, which, nevertheless, I take to
have been written by him, as being in the same Style, and all
in the same Hand, which I guess to have been of the very
Age of Chaucer. From this Collection, from those that were
in Mr. Stow’s Library, from that mention’d by Mr. Edw.
Philips in his Theatrum Poëtarum [see above, 1675, p. 250],
[p. 601] and from a multitude of others, we might, in all likelyhood,
make another intire Volume of Chaucer in Folio.
§4. A Frag¬
I shall not give myself the Trouble of
ment of The
Squire’s Tale,
multiplying Instances, to confirm what is
with a Passage at
before asserted, since those cannot but be
the End of The
Parson’s Tale, by
obvious to every one, that shall have the
which Chaucer
Curiosity to inspect and examine a little the
revokes some of
MSS.  Yet I think it proper at present to
his Works.
inform you, that as the Prologue of the
Squire’s Tale, in an excellent MS. of Mr. Selden’s,² is quite
different from that in the Print, so there are eight Verses in
the Tale itself, which are not in the Common Editions. For
whereas we have receiv’d as yet but two Verses of the third
Part, with a Note signifying, that none of the rest, notwith¬
standing diligently sought after, could be recover’d, we have
here the following ones, which immediately precede the two
already printed, viz.
But I here now wol maken a knotte,
To the tome it come nexte to my lotte.
for here ben felawes behynde an hepe truly,
That wolden talke fnl besily,
And habe here sporte, as wel as I,
And the day passith certeynly.
Therefore Oste taketh now good hede,
Who shal nexte telle, and late him spede.
And whereas you mention a Passage, intit’led Penitentia ut
dicitur pro fabula Rectoris, by which Chaucer revok’d several
¹ Inter Codd. Fairfaxii, num. 16.
³ Arch. B. 30, in Bibl. Bodl.
