
1715] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 339
our Old English Poets, and other Writers. For example,
leuest, this is the same with the Saxon leofort, most
beloved, or desirable. Goddes folke, not God his Folk, this
has plainly the Remains of the Saxon Genitive Case, [&c.].
[p. xix] "Let Lydgate, Chaucer’s Scholar also be brought in for a
. . . . . . .
Voucher;
For Chaucer that my Master was and knew
What did belong to writing Verse and Prose,
Ne’er stumbled at small faults, nor yet did view
With scornful Eye the Works and Books of those
That in his time did write, nor yet would taunt
At any Man, to fear him or to daunt.
Tho' the Verse is somewhat antiquated, yet the Example
ought not to be despised by our modern Criticks, especially
those who have any Respect for Chaucer.
[p. xxvi] To these let me add the Testimony of that Darling of the
. . . . . . . . .
Muses, Mr. Prior, with whom all the Poets of ancient and
modern Times of other Nations, or our own, might seem to
have intrusted the chief Secrets, and greatest Treasures of
their Art. I shall speak only concerning our own Island,
where his Imitation of Chaucer, of Spencer, and of the old
Scotch Poem, inscribed the Nut-Brown Maid, shew how great
a Master he is. ...
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. xxviii] Sir, from these numerous Instances, out of the writings of
our greatest and noblest Poets, it is apparent, That had the
Enmity against Monosyllables with which there are some who
make so great a Clamour, been so great in all Times, we must
have been deprived of some of the best Lines, and finest
Flowers, that are to be met with in the beautiful Garden of
our English Posie [sic]....
I speak not this, upon Confidence of any Judgment I have
in Poetry, but according to that Skill, which is natural to the
[p. xxix] Musick of a Northern Ear, which, if it be deficient, as I shall
not be very obstinate in its Defence, I beg leave it may at
least be permitted the Benefit of Mr. Dryden's Apology, for
the Musick of old Father Chaucer's Numbers, “That there is
the rude Sweetness of a Scotch Tune in it, which is natural
and pleasing, tho' not perfect.
[All the verse quotations are in black letter.]
