
360 [Dart] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1721
him: And though his Pieces have not that regular disposition
as those of the Grecians, yet the several Parts separately
compared, bear an equal value with theirs; and Mr. Dryden,
than whom there was no better Judge of the Beauties of
Homer and Virgil, positively asserts that he exceeded the
latter, and stands in competition with the former. Whoever
reads the Knight's Tale, which is the best of his Performances,
being a finished Epick Poem, and examines the Characters, the
Sentiments, the Diction, Disposition, and Time, will find that
he was not unacquainted with the Rules of that way of
Writing; but this requires an abler hand, and longer time to
enlarge upon it.
That he was a true Master of Satyr, none will deny. It
is true the Persons levelled against, and the Crimes exposed,
would not allow of the severe Scourge Juvenal made use of,
sign f.  exploded : Not but that Chaucer had a Scene of Vice in the
nor was there such a variety of Follies as Horace facetiously
l]
Court of that time, capable of supplying him with matter
sufficient for the sharpest strokes of Satyr; but he was wise
enough not to exasperate a Court by which he was supported
... and having a Court to back him, he has shewn by
severely lashing an ignorant and corrupt Clergy, that he could
(had it been safe) have applied as severe a lash to a vicious
irreligious Laity.  ...
That in the Elegiack Kind of Poetry he was a compleat
Master, appears plainly by his Complaint of the Black Knight,
the Poem called La belle Dame sans mercy, and several of his
Songs. He was an excellent Master of Love-Poetry.  ... His
Troilus and Creseide is one of the most beautiful Poems of
that kind.  ...
It is thought by some that his Verses every where consist of
an equal number of feet, and that if read with a right accent,
are no where deficient; but those nice discerning Persons
would find it difficult with all their straining and working, to
spin out some of his Verses into a measure of ten Syllables.
He was not altogether regardless of his Numbers; but his
thoughts were more intent upon solid sense than gingle, and
he tells us plainly that we must not expect regularity in all
his Verses.
His Language, how unintelligible soever it may seem, is
more modern than that of any of his Cotemporaries, or of
those that followed him at the distance of Fifty or Sixty
