
1700] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Dryden] 277
Eloquence of one whom Tacitus commends, it was auribus
istius temporis accommodata: They who liv'd with him, and
some time after him, thought it Musical; and it continues so
even in our Judgment, if compar'd with the Numbers of
Lidgate and Gower, his Contemporaries: There is the rude
Sweetness of a Scotch Tune in it, which is natural and pleasing,
though not perfect. 'Tis true, I cannot go so far as he who
publish'd the last Edition of him; for he would make us
believe the Fault is in our Ears, and that there were really
Ten Syllables in a Verse where we find but Nine: But this
Opinion is not worth confuting; 'tis so gross and obvious an
Errour, that common Sense (which is a Rule in everything
but Matters of Faith and Revelation) must convince the Reader,
that Equality of Numbers, in every Verse which we call
Heroick, was either not known, or not always practis'd, in
Chaucer's Age. It were an easie Matter to produce some
thousands of his Verses, which are lame for want of half a
Foot, and sometimes a whole one, and which no Pronunciation
can make otherwise. We can only say, that he liv’d in the
Infancy of our Poetry, and that nothing is brought to Per¬
fection at the first. We must be Children before we grow
Men. There was an Ennius, and in process of Time a Lucilius,
and a Lucretius, before Virgil and Horace; even after Chaucer
there was a Spencer, a Harrington, a Fairfax, before Waller
and Denham were in being : And our Numbers were in their
Nonage till these last appear'd. I need say little of his
Parentage, Life, and Fortunes : They are to be found at large
in all the Editions of his Works. He was employ'd abroad,
and favour'd by Edward the Third, Richard the Second,
and Henry the Fourth, and was Poet, as I suppose, to all
Three of them. In Richard’s Time, I doubt, he was a little
dipt in the Rebellion of the Commons; and being Brother¬
in-Law to John of Ghant, it was no wonder if he follow'd the
Fortunes of that Family; and was well with Henry the Fourth
vhen he depos'd his Predecessor. Neither is it to be admir'd,
that Henry, who was a wise as well as a valiant Prince, who
claim’d by Succession, and was sensible that his Title was not
sound, but was rightfully in Mortimer, who had married the
Heir of York; it was not to be admir'd, I say, if that great
Politician should be pleas'd to have the greatest Wit of those
Times in his Interests, and to be the Trumpet of his Praises.
Augustus had given him the Example, by the Advice of
