
1721] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 359
day, his morning walk and fresh contemplations. This gave
him the Advantage of describing the Morning in so lively a
manner as he does everywhere in his Works: The springing
Sun glows warm in his lines, and the fragrant Air blows cool
in his descriptions; we smell the sweets of the bloomy Haws,
and hear the Musick of the feathered Choir, when ever we
take a Forrest walk with him. The hour of the day is not
easier to be discovered from the Reflexion of the Sun in
Titian's Paintings, than in Chaucer's Morning Landskapes.
’Tis true those Descriptions are sometimes too long, and (as it
is before observed) when he takes those early rambles, he
almost tires his Reader with following him, and seldom knows
how to get out of a Forrest, when once entered into it : But
how advantageous this beautiful extravagance is, most of his
Successors well know, who have very plentifully lopt off his
exuberant Beauties, and placed them as the chief Ornaments
of their own Writings.
His Reading was deep, and extensive, his Judgment sound,
and discerning : but yet (a thing rarely found in Men of great
Learning and poignant Wit) he was communicative of his
Knowledge, and ready to correct or pass over the Faults of
his Cotemporary Writers. He knew how to judge of, and to
excuse the slips of weaker Capacities, and pitied rather than
exposed the Ignorance of that Age.
In one word, he was a great Scholar, a pleasant Wit, a
candid Critick, a sociable Companion, a stedfast Friend, a
grave Philosopher, a temperate OEconomist and a pious
Christian. He was not unacquainted with the ancient Rules
of Poetry, nor did he disdain to follow them, tho' he thought
it the least part of a Poet’s perfections. As he had a discerning
Eye, he discovered Nature in all her appearances, and stript off
every disguise with which the Gothick Writers had cloathed
her: He knew that those Dresses would change as Times
altered; but that she herself would always be the same, and
that she could never fail to please in her simple attire, nor
that Writer who drew her so; and therefore despising the
mean assistances of Art, he copied her close. He knew what
it was to be nimis Poeta, and avoided it as the most dangerous
extreme. His Strokes are bold, and his Colours lively; but
the first not too much laboured, nor the other too showy or
glaring. There is a wild Beauty in his Works, which comes
nearer the Descriptions of Homer, than any other that followed
