
276 [Dryden] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1700
which Ovid particularly excels all Poets; they are sometimes a
Fault, and sometimes a Beauty, as they are us'd properly or
improperly; but in strong Passions always to be shunn’d,
because Passions are serious, and will admit no Playing. The
French have a high Value for them; and, I confess, they are
often what they call Delicate, when they are introduc'd with
Judgment; but Chaucer writ with more Simplicity, and follow’d
Nature more closely, than to use them. I have thus far, to the
best of my Knowledge, been an upright Judge betwixt the
Parties in Competition, not medling with the Design nor the
Disposition of it; because the Design was not their own; and
in the disposing of it they were equal. It remains that I say
somewhat of Chaucer in particular.
In the first place, as he is the Father of English Poetry, so
I hold him in the same Degree of Veneration as the Grecians
held Homer, or the Romans Virgil: He is a perpetual
Fountain of good Sense; learn'd in all Sciences; and, there¬
fore speaks properly on all Subjects : As he knew what to
say, so he knows also when to leave off; a Continence which
is practis'd by few Writers, and scarcely by any of the
Ancients, excepting Virgil and Horace. One of our late
great Poets is sunk in his Reputation, because he cou'd never
forgive any Conceit which came in his way; but swept like
a Drag-net, great and small. There was plenty enough, but
the Dishes were ill sorted; whole Pyramids of Sweet-meats
for Boys and Women; but little of solid Meat for Men : All
this proceeded not from any want of Knowledge, but of Judg¬
ment; neither did he want that in discerning the Beauties
and Faults of other Poets; but only indulg'd himself in the
Luxury of Writing; and perhaps knew it was a Fault, but
hoped the Reader would not find it. For this Reason, though
he must always be thought a great Poet, he is no longer
esteemed a good Writer: And for Ten Impressions, which his
Works have had in so many successive Years, yet at present a
hundred Books are scarcely purchased once a Twelvemonth:
For, as my last Lord Rochester said, though somewhat profanely,
Not being of God, he could not stand.
Chaucer follow’d Nature every where, but was never so bold
to go beyond her: And there is a great Difference of being
Poeta and nimis Poeta, if we may believe Catullus, as much as
betwixt a modest Behaviour and Affectation. The Verse of
sign.
*B2b]
Chaucer, I confess, is not Harmonious to us; but ’tis like the
