
282 [Dryden] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1700
its Sound and Significancy, deserves to be reviv'd, I have
that reasonable Veneration for Antiquity, to restore it. All
beyond this is Superstition. Words are not like Land-marks,
so sacred as never to be remov'd: Customs are chang’d, and
even Statutes are silently repeal’d, when the Reason ceases
for which they were enacted. As for the other Part of the
Argument, that his Thoughts will lose of their original Beauty
by the innovation of Words; in the first place, not only their
Beauty, but their Being is lost, when they are no longer
understood, which is the present Case. I grant that something
must be lost in all Transfusion, that is, in all Translations; but
the Sense will remain, which would otherwise be lost, or at
least be maim’d, where it is scarce intelligible; and that but to
a few. How few are they who can read Chaucer, so as to
[sign. *D1]
*D1]
understand him perfectly? And if imperfectly, then with
less Profit, and no Pleasure. 'Tis not for the Use of some old
Saxon Friends, that I have taken these Pains with him: Let
them neglect my Version, because they have no need of it. I
made it for their sakes, who understand Sense and Poetry, as
well as they; when that Poetry and Sense is put into Words
which they understand. I will go farther, and dare to add,
that what Beauties I lose in some Places, I give to others
which had them not originally : But in this I may be partial to
my self; let the Reader judge, and I submit to his Decision.
Yet I think I have just Occasion to complain of them, who be¬
cause they understand Chaucer, would deprive the greater part
of their Countrymen of the same Advantage, and hoord him up,
as Misers do their Grandam Gold, only to look on it themselves,
and hinder others from making use of it. In sum, I seriously
protest, that no Man ever had, or can have, a greater Venera¬
tion for Chaucer than my self. I have translated some part
of his Works, only that I might perpetuate his Memory, or at
least refresh it, amongst my Countrymen. If I have alter’d
him anywhere for the better, I must at the same time acknow¬
ledge, that I could have done nothing without him : Facile est
inventis addere, is no great Commendation; but I am not so
vain to think I have deserv’d a greater. I will conclude
what I have to say of him singly, with this one Remark:
A Lady of my acquaintance, who keeps a kind of Correspond¬
ence with some Authors of the Fair Sex in France, has been
inform'd by them, that Mademoiselle de Scudery, who is as old
as Sibyl, and inspir'd like her by the same God of Poetry, is at
