
1709]   Chaucer Criticism and Allusion.  [Hearne] 305
with far better than I can pretend to. I shall, however, if I
meet with any Edition, that you have not specify’d, let you
know of it; and in the mean time I must take notice, that I
have seen some Pieces of him printed separately that you
have not mention’d, and ’tis likely I may meet with others
hereafter in my Searches. Amongst Mr. Selden’s printed
Books in the Bodleian Library is a Quarto Collection of old
Romantick Pieces, the first of which is, The story of the noble
Kynge Richard Cure de Lyon, pr. at London by Wynkyn de
Worde an. MDXXVIII.  The Author’s name is not added, and
therefore ’tis put down in Dr. Hyde’s Catalogue as an
anonymous Tract; but, upon consulting the Book, I find, that
some body, perhaps one that was formerly Owner of it, has
writ the following Words at the Beginning, By Jeffree Charsher
Pooet Laret. What Authority he had for this, I will not
pretend to guess; but I thought fit to give you an account of
it, that you may, at your leisure, examine into it. In the
same Library we have another Collection of old English Pieces,
which was also Mr. Selden’s, in which is the Ploughman’s
Tale, with a short Exposition of the Words and Matters, pr.
at Lond, MDCVI. Quarto. This Exposition is very usefull, and
the Author, who, it may be, was the said Francis Thinne,
[p. 600] shews himself to be a Man of Skill, and to have been a Master
of Chaucer. Besides these two Pieces, I must hint to you,
that the famous Mr. Elias Ashmole has printed, The Tale of
the Chanon’s Yeoman, in his Theatrum Chem.¹ [see above, 1652,
p. 227]  (before which he has put Chaucer’s Picture and
Epitaph from Westminster-Abbey) and that in his Museum
at Oxford is The Miller’s Tale, and The Tale of the Wife of
Bath, with Comments, pr. at London in MDCLXV. [see ante, 1665,
p. 242] which last I have not yet seen; but I shall take the
first opportunity to do it, and I will not fail to let you
know the Issue of my Inquiry.
§3. Whonever-
theless have not
But notwithstanding these excellent
been so exact in
Persons Labours were so successfull, as that
their Editions,
they may seem, perhaps, to some to have
but that they
might be still cor¬
superseded all future Attempts, yet I may
rected and sup¬
with Modesty assert, that a much more
ply’d from MSS.
and some Tracts
correct and compleat Edition of Chaucer
added that were
might be given than any that has hitherto
never yet pub¬
lish’d.
appear’d. I have consulted some of our
Oxford MSS. and find that the Print is in a
¹ Pag. 227.
CHAUCER CRITICISM.
