1569. B., G. [Barnabe Googe or William Baldwin?] A newe Booke
called the Shippe of safegarde, wrytten by G. B. anno 1569. Im¬
printed at London by W. Seres, sign. D vii b. (British bibliographer,
ed. Sir S. E. Brydges, vol. ii, 1820, pp. 628-9.)
[The writer describes Hypocrisy as]
A rocke but soft and simple to the eie,
That pleaseth much the minde of worldlye sight,
Whereas disceyte doth closely couered lie,
Which hindreth men from trauailing aright,
The place is large and riseth some thing hie,
Upon the top whereof in open sight,
There stands an Image couered all of stone,
That there was placed many yeares agone.
Which Image here I would describe to thee,
But that long since it hath bene painted plaine
By learned Chaucer that gem of Poetrie,
Who passed the reach of any English braine,
A follie therefore were it here for me,
To touch that he with pencell once did staine.
Take here therefore what he therof doth say,
Writ in the Romance of his Roses gaye.
¶ Another thing was done their write,
That seemed like an Hypocrite,
And it was cleped Pope holye,
. . . . .
[Romance of the Rose, quoted, ll. 418-48.]
Thus hath the golden pen of Chaucer olde,
The Image plaine descriued to the eie,
Who passing by long since did it beholde,
And tooke a note therof aduisedly,
Unto his fellowes of that age it tolde,
And left it eke for his posteritie,
That ech man passing by might plainly know,
The perfite substance of that flattring show.
[This book has been attributed to both Googe and Baldwin, the G. standing for the
latter's Christian name in Latin. In the Stationers' register, ed. E. Arber, no author,
is named. The dedication by G. B. is addressed to “his very good sisters Mistresse
Phillyp Darell and Mistresse Frances Darell, of the house of Scotneys." As Barnabe
Googe was the husband of Mary, dau. of Thomas Darell of Scotney, Kent, and one of her
sisters was called Frances, and as Baldwin had apparently no connection with the
Darells of Scotney, it seems more probable, in spite of the order of the initials that
Googe, and not Baldwin, was its author. There is a unique copy of this work in
the John Rylands library, Manchester; Brydges only prints an extract. See below,
pp. 171-2, Anthony Nixon, 1602.]