1590-6. Spenser, Edmund. The Faerie Queene.... 1590. The second
part of the Faerie Queene, containing the fourth, fifth, and sixth
bookes, 1596; book iv, canto 2, p. 28 [should be p. 30). Two cantos
of Mutabilitie [i. e. part of book 7, first printed in] The Faerie
Queene, 1609, book vii, canto 7, p. 359. Cf. also book i, canto 1, p.
5 [catalogue of the trees], with the Parliament of Foules, ll., 176, etc.
(Works of Spenser, ed. A. B. Grosart, 1882-4, vols. vii, pp. 70-1;
viii, p. 296. Globe edn., ed. R. Morris, 1869, pp. 239, 430.)
[The Squire brings word to Sir Blandamour and Sir Paridell
that two knights and two ladies they have overtaken are:]
[Book IV,
Two of the prowest Knights in Faery lond;
canto 2
xxxi]
And those two Ladies their two louers deare,
Couragious Cambell, and stout Triamond,
With Canacee and Cambine linckt in louely bond.
Whylome as antique stories tellen vs,
Those two were foes the fellonest on ground,
And battell made the dreddest daungerous
That euer shrilling trumpet did resound;
Though now their acts be no where to be found,
As that renowmed Poet them compyled,
With warlike numbers and Heroicke sound,
Dan Chaucer, well of Englishe vndefyled,
On Fames eternall beadroll worthie to be fyled.
But wicked Time that all good thoughts doth waste,
And workes of noblest wits to nought out weare,
That famous moniment hath quite defaste,
And robd the world of threasure endlesse deare,
The which mote haue enriched all vs heare.
O cursed Eld the cankerworme of writs,
How may these rimes, so rude as doth appeare,
Hope to endure, sith workes of heauenly wits
Are quite deuourd, and brought to nought by little bits?
Then pardon, O most sacred happie spirit,
That I thy labours lost may thus reuiue,
And steale from thee the meede of thy due merit,
That none durst euer whilest thou wast aliue,
And being dead in vaine yet many striue:
Ne dare I like, but through infusion sweete
Of thine owne spirit, which doth in me surviue,
I follow here the footing of thy feete,
That with thy meaning so I may the rather meete.
. . . . . . . . . .
[Book vii,  So heard it is for any liuing wight,
canto 7,
st. ix]
All her [Dame Nature's] array and vestiments to tell
That old Dan Geffrey (in whose gentle spright
The pure well head of Poesie did dwell)
In his Foules parley durst not with it mel,
But it transferd to Alane, who he thought
Had in his Plaint of kindes describ'd it well:
Which who will read set forth so as it ought,
Go seek he out that Alane where he may be sought.