1586. Webbe, William. A Discourse of English Poetrie, [only two
copies known, of which one is among the Malone books in the
Bodl, libraryl, sign. C ii b, C iii, D iii, E iiii. (English Reprints, ed.
E. Arber, 1871, pp. 31-2, 41, 52; Elizabethan Critical Essays, ed.
G. Gregory Smith, 1904, vol. i, pp. 241, 251, 263.)
[sign. C ii b,   The first of our English Poets that I haue heard of was Iohn
Ciii]
Gower... his freend Chawcer.. speaketh of him often¬
times in diuers places of hys workes. Chawcer, who for that
excellent fame which hee obtayned in his Poetry, was alwayes
accounted the God of English Poets (such a tytle for honours
sake hath beene giuen him),. . . hath left many workes, both
for delight and profitable knowledge, farre exceeding any other
that as yet euer since hys time directed theyr studies that way.
Though the manner of hys stile may seeme blunte and course
to many fine English eares at these dayes, yet in trueth, if it
be equally pondered, and with good judgment aduised, and
confirmed with the time wherein he wrote, a man shall per¬
ceiue thereby euen a true picture or perfect shape of a right
Poet. He by his delightsome vayne, so gulled the eares of
men with his deuises, that, although corruption bare such
sway in most matters, that learning and truth might skant bee
admitted to shewe it selfe, yet without controllment, myght
hee gyrde at the vices and abuses of all states, and gawle with
very sharpe and eger inuentions, which he did so learnedly
and pleasantly, that none therefore would call him into
question. For such was his bolde spyrit, that what enormities
he saw in any, he would not spare to pay them home, eyther
in playne words, or els in some prety and pleasant couert,
that the simplest might espy him.
. . . . . . . . . . .
[sign. D iii]
Let thinges that are faigned for pleasures sake haue a neer
resemblance of the truth. This precept may you perceiue to
bee most duelie obserued of Chawcer: for who could with
more delight prescribe such wholsome counsaile and sage
aduise, where he seemeth onelie to respect the profitte of his
lessons and instructions? or who coulde with greater wisedome,
or more pithie skill, vnfold such pleasant and delightsome
matters of mirth, as though they respected nothing but the
telling of a merry tale? so that this is the very grounde of
right poetrie, to give profitable counsaile, yet so as it must be
mingled with delight.