1581. Lawson, John. Lawsons Orchet, wharin thou shall fynde most
pleasaunt fructe of all mannor of sortes. That is to sai, the true
acte, fact, or deade, of euery Prince reininge in this lande sens yt
was first inhabett, with the yeares of thaire contynuaunce: and the
varieite of the opinyons of the Historiographers, newcly gathyred,
and augmented, contynuinge vnto the Conquest.—1581.— [Then
follows a note at the foot of the page] A°. Dm. 1581, et Regin.
Elizab. 23. Jho. lawson feodary in y e County of Northub: sent
me this booke. [And below it in a modern hand] This is Lord
Burghleigh's Handwriting. Lansdowne MSS. 208, ff. 411-411 b.
(This extract is printed by S. E. Brydges in Restituta, vol. iv,
1814, p. 29.)
[A personal Address from the Author] To the Reader [at
the end of the Chronicle is followed by a kind of Dedicatory
and explanatory address.]
[fol. 411] To the right honorable lorde Burghley &c. sir William
Damsell Knight, and to all his other good maisters off the
courte of wairdes and liuereis theire humble seruaunte John
lawson, wisheethe healthe, &c.
. . . . . . . . . .
Yet not so contented for more ease to have vnderstande
Thaire travell all, whiche shynde as pearles in dede,
I tooke maister John Iydgaite strighte then in my hande,
With whome the reste of my tyme I thought to leede:
Whose wordye praise and everlastynge meade,
[fol. 411 b] Thoo he was a monnke at that Abbay late Bury,
Myghte be in equale prase with maister Chawcer truly.
I might thaire reade the greate and actyve chyuelvie;
Betwene yᵉ Troyaine knightes, and yᵉ Greekes all;
Chawcer nor Gowere was neuer of more antiquitie
In proise or miter, with theire Englisshe literall,
Thaire ortographia, stile, nor syllapes in especiall:
(Whiche Iyghtned my harte the enterpryse for to take)
Than was master Iydgaite in the verses he did make.
That tedyous tyme he haithe discouered out at lardge:
In englysshe verse, right plesaunde to the eare;
Shewinge all the Pamfylie thaire haitered and rage,
Under blossomes of rethoricke, yᵉ style it shoulde not dere:
Off whoose pretence thoo I, maisters, may not come nere:
To attempte suche eloquence in als wightye a matter;
Made me take on hande yᵉ Iyke, to followe at laser.