1597. Beaumont, Francis. F. B. to his very louing friend T.S. [Letter
to Thomas Speght in] The Workes of .... Chaucer [ed. T. Speght],
1598, sign. [a iii b-a v].
[sign. a iii b] I am sorrie that neither the worthinesse of Chaucers owne
praise, nor the importunate praiers of diuerse your louing
friends can yet mooue you to put into print those good
obseruations and collections you haue written of him. For as
for the obiections, that in our priuate talke you are wont to
say are commonly alledged against him, as first that many of
his wordes (as it were with ouerlong lying) are growne too
hard and vnpleasant, and next that hee is somewhat too broad
in some of his speeches, and that the worke therefore should
be the lesse gratious : these are no causes, or no sufficient
causes to withhold from Chaucer such desert of glorie, as at
your pleasure you may bestow vpon him. For first to defend
him against the first reproofe. [Beaumont shows that no man
can so write in the shifting language of every day, ] as that all
his wordes may remain currant many yeares. [This even
happens among the Latin writers themselues, when Latin was
a spoken tongue]....
But yet so pure were Chaucers wordes in his owne daies,
as Lidgate that learned man calleth him The Loadstarre of
the English language: and so good they are in our daies, as
Maister Spencer... hath adorned his owne stile with that
beauty and grauitie, which Tully speakes of : [reviving ancient
words] and his much frequenting of Chaucers antient speeches
causeth many to allow farre better of him, then otherwise they
would...
Touching the inciuilitie Chaucer is charged withall; What
Romane Poet hath lesse offended this way than hee? [Virgil
and Ovid are worse, Plautus and Terence are most to be ex¬
cused, because they observed decorum] in giuing to their
comicall persons such manner of speeches as did best fit their
dispositions. And may not the same be saied for Chaucer ?
How much had hee swarued from Decorum, if hee had made
his Miller, his Cooke, and his Carpenter, to haue told such
honest and good tales, as hee made his Knight, his Squire, his
Lawyer, and Scholler tell? ....
Chaucers deuise of his Canterburie Pilgrimage is meerely
his owne, without following the example of any that euer writ
before him. His drift is to touch all sortes of men, and to
discouer all vices of that Age, and that he doth in such sort,
as he neuer failes to hit euery marke he leuels at...
Chaucer [may] bee rightly called, The pith and sinewes of
eloquence, and the verie life it selfe of all mirth and pleasant
writing : besides one gifte hee hath aboue other Authours, and
that is, by the excellencie of his descriptions to possesse his
Readers with a stronger imagination of seeing that done before
their eyes, which they reade, than any other that euer writ in
any tongue. And here I cannot forget to remember vnto you
those auncient learned men of our time in Cambridge, whose
diligence in reading of his workes them selues, and commending
them to others of the younger sorte, did first bring you and
mee in loue with him: and one of them at that time was and
now is (as you knowe) one of the rarest Schollers of the
worlde. The same may bee saide of that worthy man for
learning, your good friend in Oxford, who with many other
of like excellent iudgement haue euer had Chaucer in most
high reputation.  ...
From Leicester the last of Iune, Anno 1597.
Your assured and euer louing friend
Francis Beaumont
[Francis Beaumont, judge, d. 1598, was the father of the dramatist; he and Speght
were both at Peterhouse between 1560-70; and he prided himself on being one of
those who first urged Speght to edit Chaucer. "The rarest scholler" alluded to is
possibly Abp. John Whitgift, who was during those years Fellow of Peterhouse,
Master of Trinity College, Regius Professor of Divinity, etc. We have been unable to
trace the identity of "your good friend in Oxford." This letter, somewhat expanded,
appeared again in Speght’s edn. of 1602, though Beaumont died in 1598. See below,
1683-4, pp. 256-7, where Aubrey quotes this letter.]