1598. Thynne, Francis. Animadversions uppon the annotaciouns and
corrections of some imperfections of impressiones of Chaucer’s
Workes... 1598, sett downe by F. Thynne. MS. in the Bridge¬
water Library. (Ed. F. J. Furnivall, Chaucer soc., 1875 and 1891,
pp. 4-75.)
To Master Thomas Speighte
ffrancis Thynn sendethe
greetinge
The Industrye and loue (master Speighte) whiche yoᵘ haue
vsed, and beare, vppon and to oure famous poete Geffrye
Chaucer, deseruethe bothe comendatione and furtherance: the
one to recompense your trauayle, the other to accomplyshe the
duetye, whiche we all beare (or at the leaste, yf we reuerence
lernynge or regarde the honor of oure Countrye, sholde beare)
to suche a singuler ornamente of oure tonge as the woorkes of
Chaucer are: Yet since there is nothinge so fullye perfected,
by anye one, whereine somme imperfectione maye not bee
founde, (for as the prouerbe is, ’Barnardus,’ or as others have,
’Alanus, non videt omnia,') yoᵘ must be contented to gyue me
leave, in discharge of the duetye and loue which I beare to
Chaucer, (whome I suppose I have as great intereste to adorne
withe my smale skyll as anye other hath, in regarde that the
laborious care of my father made hym most acceptable to the
worlde in correctinge and augmentinge his woorkes,) to enter
into the examinatione of this newe editione, and that the
[p. 5] rather, because yoᵘ, with Horace his verse “si quid nouisti
rectius istis, candidus imparti," have willed all others to
further the same, and to accepte your labors in good parte,
whiche, as I most willingly doo, so meanynge but well to the
worke, I ame to lett yoᵘ vnderstande my conceyte thereof,
whiche before this, yf yoᵘ woulde have vouchesafed my howse,
or have thoughte me worthy to have byn acqueynted with
these matters (whiche yoᵘ might well haue donne without anye
whatsoeuer dispargement [sic] to your selfe,) yoᵘ sholde haue
vnderstoode before the impressione, althoughe this whiche I
here write ys not nowe vppon selfe will or fonnd conceyte to
wrangle for one asses shadowe, or to seke a knott in a rushe,
but in frendlye sorte to bringe truthe to lighte, a thinge whiche
I wolde desire others to vse towardes mee in whatsoeuer shall
fall oute of my penne. Wherefore I will here shewe suche
thinges as, in mye opynione, may seme to be touched, not
medlinge withe the seconde editione to one inferior personne
[John Stowe’s, 1561, above, p. 96] then my fathers editione was.
Fyrste in your forespeche to the reader, yoᵘ saye ’second¬
Iy, the texte by written copies corrected' by whiche worde
’corrected,' I maye seme to gather, that yoᵘ imagine greate
imperfectione in my fathers editione, whiche peraduenture
maye move others to saye (as some vnadvisedlye have sayed)
that my father had wronged Chaucer :) Wherefore, to stoppe
that gappe, I will answere, that Chaucers woorkes have byn
sithens printed twyce, yf not thrice, and therfore by oure care¬
[p. 6] lesse (and for the most parte vnlerned) printers of Englande,
not so well performed as yt ought to bee: so that, of
necessytye, bothe in matter, myter, and meaninge, yt must
needes gather corruptione, passinge throughe so manye handes,
as the water dothe, the further it runnethe from the pure
founteyne. To enduce me and all others to iudge his editione
(whiche I thinke yoᵘ neuer sawe wholye to-gether, beinge fyrst
printed but in one coolume [sic] in a page, whereof I will speake
hereafter) was the perfectest: ys the ernest desire and loue
my father hadde to haue Chaucers Woorkes rightlye to
be published. for the performance wherof, my father not onlye
vsed the helpe of that lerned and eloquent kn[i]ghte and anti¬
quarye Sir Briane Tuke, but had also made greate serche for
copies to perfecte his woorkes, as apperethe in the ende of the
squiers tale, in his editione printed in the yere 1542; but
further had comissione to serche all the liberaries of Englande
for Chaucers Workes, so that oute of all the Abbies of this
Realme (whiche reserved anye monumentes thereof) he was
fully furnished with multitude of Bookes. emongest whiche,
one coppye of some part of his woorkes came to his handes
subscribed in diuers places withe “examinatur Chaucer." By
this Booke, and conferringe manye of the other written copies
to-gether, he deliuered his editione, fullye corrected, as the
amendementes vnder his hande, in the fyrst printed booke that
euer was of his woorkes (beinge stamped by the fyrste impres¬
[p. 7] sione that was in England) will well declare, at what tyme he
added manye things whiche were not before printed, as yoᵘ
nowe haue donne soome, of whiche I am perswaded (and that
not withoute reasone) the originall came from mee. In whiche
his editione, beinge printed but with one coolume in a syde,
there was the pilgrymes tale, a thinge moore odious to the
[p. 8] Clergye, then the speche of the plowmanne; that pilgrimes
tale begynnynge in this sorte:
In Lincolneshyre fast by a fenne,
Standes a relligious howse who dothe
yt kenne, &c.1
[p.9] In this tale did Chaucer [that is, the unknown author] most
bitterlye enueye against the pride, state, couetousnes, and
extorcione of the Bysshoppes, their officialls, Archdeacons,
vicars generalls, comissaryes, and other officers of the spirituall
courte. The Inuentione and order whereof (as I haue herde yt
related by some, nowe of good worshippe bothe in courte and
countrye, but then my fathers clerkes,) was, that one comynge
into this relligious howse, walked vpp and doune the churche,
beholdinge goodlye pictures of Bishoppes in the windowes, at
lengthe the manne contynuynge in that contemplatione, not
knowinge what Bishoppes they were, a graue olde manne withe
[1 This appears in The Newe Courte of Venus, see above, p. 82 [1536-40?],
The Pilgrim's Tale.
a longe white hedde and berde, in a large blacke garment girded
vnto hym, came forthe and asked hym, what he iudged
of those pictures in the windowes, who sayed he knewe not
what to make of them, but that they looked Iyke vnto our
mitred Bishoppes; to whome the old father replied, “yt
is true, they are Iyke, but not the same, for our byshoppes are
farr degenerate from them,” and withe that, made a large
discourse of the Bishopps and of their courtes.
This tale, when kinge henrye the eighte had redde, he called
my father unto hym, sayinge, “William Thynne! I dobte this
will not be allowed; for I suspecte the Byshoppes will call
[p. 10] the in questione for yt". to whome my father, beinge in great
fauore with his prince, (as manye yet lyuinge canne testyfye,)
sayed, “yf your grace be not offended, I hoope to be protected
by yoᵘ:" wherevppon the kinge bydd hym goo his waye, and
feare not. All whiche not withstandinge, my father was
called in questione by the Byshoppes, and heaued at by
Cardinall Wolseye, his olde enymye, for manye causes, but
mostly for that my father had furthered Skelton to publishe
his ’Collen Cloute’ againste the Cardinall, the moste parte of
whiche Booke was compiled in my fathers howse at Erithe in
Kente. But for all my fathers frendes, the Cardinalls per¬
swadinge auctorytye was so greate withe the kinge, that thoughe
by the kinges fauor my father escaped bodelye daunger, yet
the Cardinall caused the kinge so muche to myslyke of that
tale, that chaucer must be newe printed, and that discourse of
the pilgrymes tale lefte oute [with regard to this supposed
cancelled edn. by Wm. Thynne, see note by Mr. Bradshaw in
Thynne's Animadversions, ed. Furnivall, pp. 75-6]; and so
beinge printed agayne, some thynges were forsed to be
omitted, and the plowmans tale (supposed, but vntrulye, to be
made by olde Sir Thomas Wyat, father to hym which was
executed in the firste yere of Quene Marye, and not by Chaucer)
with much ado permitted to passe with the reste, in suche
sorte that in one open parliamente (as I haue herde Sir Johne
Thynne reporte, beinge then a member of the howse,) when
talke was had of Bookes to be forbidden, Chaucer had there
for euer byn condempned, had yt not byn that his woorkes had
byn counted but fables. Whereunto yf yoᵘ will replye, that
[p. 11] their colde not be any suche pilgrymes tale, because Chaucer in
his prologues makethe not mentione of anye suche personne,
which he wolde haue donne yf yt had byn so: for after that
he had recyted the knighte, the squyer, the squiers yeomane,
the prioresse, her noonne, and her thre preistes, the monke, the
fryer, the marchant, the Clerke of Oxenforde, seriante at the
lawe, franckleyne, haberdassher, goldsmythe, webbe, dyer and
tapyster, Cooke, shypmane, doctor of physicke, wyfe of Bathe,
parsonne and plowmane, he sayethe at the ende of the plow¬
mans prologe,
There was also a Reue, and a millere,
A Sumpnoure, and a Pardoner,
A manciple, and myselfe; there was no mo.
All whiche make xxx persons with Chaucer: Wherefore yf
there had byn anye moore, he wolde also haue recyted them in
those verses : whereunto I answere, that in the prologes he lefte
oute somme of those whiche tolde their tales: as the chanons
yomane, because he came after that they were passed out
of theyre Inne, and did ouer-take them, as in Iyke sorte this
pilgrime did or mighte doo, and so afterwardes be one of their
companye, as was that chanons yeomane, althoughe Chaucer
talke no moore of this pilgrime in his prologe then he doothe
of the Chanons yeomane: whiche I dobt not wolde fullye
appere, yf the pilgrimes prologe and tale mighte be restored to
his former light, they being nowe looste, as manye other
of Chaucers tales were before that, as I ame induced to thinke
by manye reasons.
But to leave this, I must saye that in those many written
Bookes of Chaucer, whiche came to my fathers handes there
were manye false copyes, whiche Chaucer shewethe in writinge
of Adam Scriuener (as yoᵘ haue noted): of whiche written
[p.12] copies there came to me after my fathers deathe some fyue and
twentye, whereof some had moore, and some fewer, tales, and
some but two. and some three. whiche bookes beinge by me (as
one nothinge dobting of this whiche ys nowe donne for
Chaucer) partly dispersed aboute xxvj yeres a-goo and partlye
stoolen oute of my howse at Popler: I gaue diuers of them to
Stephen Batemanne, person of Newington, and to diuers other,
whiche beinge copies vnperfecte, and some of them corrected
by my fathers hande, yt maye happen soome of them to coome
to somme of your frendes handes; whiche I knowe yf I see
agayne: and yf by anye suche written copies you have corrected
Chaucer, you maye as well offende as seme to do good. But I
judge the beste, for in dobtes I will not resolue with a settled
iudgemente althoughe yoᵘ may iudge this tediouse discourse of
my father a needlesse thinge in setting forthe his diligence in
breaking the yce, and gyuinge lighte to others, who may moore
easeyly perfecte then begyne any thinge, for "facilius est
addere quam Inuenire": and so to other matters.
[Next Thynne details 15 mistakes made by Speght, of which
the following directly concern Chaucer, viz :—
[pp. 12-13] (1) He states that Richard Chaucer (the poet's grandfather)
was his father.
[pp. 14-15] (2) He says Heralds think Chaucer came of a mean house,
[p.17] (4) He conjectures (from merchants' arms in windows) that
because his armes are mean.— This “ys a slender coniecture".
[pp.18-19] (5) He misquotes Gower; who does not call Chaucer "a
Chaucer’s ancestors were merchants.—This has no validity.
worthye poet" nor "dothe he make hym iudge of his
Workes". But on the contrary Chaucer submits his works to
Gower in Troilus, book v. This error is Bales' and "yoᵘ have
swallowed yt".
[pp. 21-2] (7) He assumes that because in the Temple Records it
is noted that Chaucer beat a Franciscan Friar, that therefore
Gower belonged to the Temple as well as Chaucer; whereas
Thynne doubts whether Chaucer ever belonged to the Temple.
[p. 22] (8) He says he does not know the name of Chaucer's wife.
Nor does Thynne; for though some think it was Elizabeth,
a waiting woman to Queen Philippa, who had a grant of
a yearly stipend, ho believes this was Chaucer's sister or kins¬
woman, who became a nun at S. Helen’s, London.
[pp.27-30] Thynne then details mistakes made by Speght as to the
'Roman de la Rose' and Chaucer's 'Dreme'  or 'Dethe of
Blaunche the Duchesse'.
[pp 31-68] He then shows mistakes Speght has made in explaining
Chaucer's old words, and in annotations on, and corrections
of the text of Chaucer.— He then points out six more
mistakes :—
[pp. 68-9] (1) That Speght has wrongly placed the 'Plowman's Tale'
(before the Parson's Tale). Thynne’s father put it after the
Parson's Tale (which by Chaucer's own words was the last tale)
because he could not see by any prologues of the other tales
where else to place it. But it ought to"be sett in some other
place before the manciple and persons tale, and not as yt ys in
the last editione."]
(2) One other thinge ys, that yt wolde be good that
Chaucer's proper woorkes were distinguyshed from the adulterat,
and suche as were not his, as the Testamente of Cressyde, The
Letter of Cupide, and the ballade begynnynge 'I haue a
layde, where so she bee' &c., whiche Chaucer never composed,
as may suffycientlye be proued by the thinges them selues.
(3) The thirde matter ys, that in youre epistle dedicatorye
[p. 70] to Sir Roberte Cecille, yoᵘ saye, “This Booke, whene yt was
first published in printe, was dedicate to Kinge Henrye the
eighte". But that is not soo, for the firste dedicatione to that
kinge was by mye father, when diuerse of Chaucers woorkes
[p. 71] had byn thrise printed before; whereof two editions were by
William Caxtone, the fyrste printer of Englande, who first
printed Chaucers tales in one colume in a ragged letter, and
after in one colume in a better order; and the thirde editione
was printed, as farre as I remember, by winkine de word
or Richarde Pynson, the seconde and thirde printers of Eng¬
lande, as I take them. Whiche three edit[i]ons beinge verye
imperfecte and corrupte, occasioned my father (for the love he
oughte to Chawcers lernynge) to seeke the augmente and
correctione of Chawcer's Woorkes, whiche he happely fynyshed;
the same beinge, since that tyme, by often printinge muche
corrupted.  ...
[Francis Thynne makes two mistakes here. (1) Speght was alluding to the
collected edn. of Chaucer's 'Workes' first made by William Thynne, which was the
basis of his own edn. Wm. Thynne's dedication is reprinted in all the old editions,
1542 (1550), 1561, 1598, 1602, 1687 and 1721.
(2) Only one edn. of Chaucer's Works had been published before the date of
Thynne's 1532, and that was Pynson's [see note under 1582, Thynne, p. 78]. But
many soparate works of Chaucer had been published before 1582.]
(4) [Speght, in his catalogue of authors, has omitted many
authors 'vouched by chawcer'.
(5) & (6) Speght misreads 'Haroltes' for 'Harlottes'; and
[p. 74] 'Minoresse' for Moueresse,'  both in the “Romaunt of the Rose’].
Thus hoopinge that yoᵘ will accepte in good and frendlye
[p. 75] parte, these my whatsoeuer conceytes vttered vnto yoᵘ, (to the
ende Chawcer's Woorkes by muche conference and manye
iudgments mighte at leng[t]he obteyne their true perfectione
and glorye, — as I truste they shall yf yt please godde to
lende me tyme and leysure to reprinte, correcte, and comente
the same, after the manner of the Italians, who haue largelye
comented Petrarche;)—I sett ends to these matters: comyt¬
tinge you to god, and me to your Curtesye. Clerkenwell
Greene, the xvi of december, 1599. Your louinge frende,
FRANCIS THYNNE.