1570. Foxe, John. Ecclesiasticall history contaynyng the Actes and
Monumentes of thynges passed in euery Kynges tyme in this Realme.
. Newly recognised and inlarged by the Author, John Foxe.
[2nd edn.] At London, Printed by Iohn Daye... 1570, vol. i,
sign. sign iiij, pp. 341-5, vol, ii, pp. 965-66 (ed. G. Townsend,
1843-9, vol. i, pp. xxii-iii; vol. ii, 1842, pp. 357-63; vol. iv, 1846,
pp. 248-50).
[None of these references are in the first edition of 1563, but they appear in full in
this, the second edition of 1570, from which they are copied, and are not increased in
the latest edition in Foxe's lifetime, that of 1583. This was, as is well known, a very
popular work, of which nine editions appeared by 1684; viz. 1563, 1570, 1576, 1583,
1596, 1610, 1632, 1641, 1684.]
[Vol. i. sign
sign iiij.] (A Protestation to the whole Church of England.)
To discend now somewhat lower in drawing out the descent
of the Church–What a multitude here commeth of faithful
witnesses in the time of Ioh. Wickleffe, as Ocliffe, Wickleffe,
an. 1376. W. Thorpe, White, Puruey, Patshall, Payne,
Gower, Chauser, Gascogne, William Swynderby, Walter Brute,
Roger Dexter, William Sautry about the year 1400. Iohn
Badley, an 1410. Nicholas Tayler, Rich. Wagstaffe, Mich.
Scriuener, W. Smith, Iohn Henry, W. Parchmenar, Roger
Goldsmith, with an Ancresse called Mathilde in the Citie of
Leicester, Lord Cobham, Syr Roger Acton Knight, Iohn Beuer¬
ley preacher, Iohn Hus, Hierome of Prage Scholemaster, with
a number of faithfull Bohemians and Thaborites not to be told
with whom I might also adioyne Laurentius Valla, and
Ioannes Picus the learned Earle of Mirandula. But what do
I stand upon recitall of names, which almost are infinite.
. . . . . . . . . . .
[Vol. i,
For so much as mention is here made of these superstitious
p. 341]
sects of Fryers, and such other beggerly religions, it shall not
seme much impartinent, being moued by the occasion hereof
... to annexe... a certayne other auncient treatise com¬
piled by Geoffray Chawcer by the way of a Dialogue or ques¬
tions moued in the person of a certaine uplandish and simple
ploughman of the Countrey, which treatise for the same, y e
autor intituled Jack vp land...
¶ A treatise of Geoffrey Chawcer intituled
Iacke vplande
[Here follows a reprint of Jack Upland. See above, p. 83.]
. . . . . . . . . . .
[Vol. ii,
p. 965]
Moreouer to these two [Linacre & Pace], I thought it not
Geffray
Chaucer.
out of season, to couple also some mention of Geffray
Iohn
Chaucer, and Iohn Gower: Whiche although beyng much
Gower.
discrepant from these in course of yeares, yet it may seme not
vnworthy to bee matched with these forenamed persons in com¬
mendation of their studie and learnyng...
... Likewise, as touching the tyme of Chaucer, by hys
owne workes in the end of his first booke of Troylus and
Creseide it is manifest, that he and Gower were both of one
Chaucer
& Gower
tyme, althoughe it seemeth that Gower was a great deale his
com-
auncient : both notably learned, as the barbarous rudenes of
mended
for their
that tyme did geue, both great frends together, and both in
studious
exercise.
like kind of studie together occupied, so endeuoryng them¬
selues, and employing their tyme, that they excelling many
other in study and exercise of good letters did passe forth their
Iyues here right worshipfully & godly to the worthye fame
and commendation of their name. Chaucers woorkes bee all
printed in one volume, and therfore knowen to all men.
This I meruell, to see the idle life of y e priestes and clergye
men of that tyme, seyng these lay persons shewed themselues
in these kynde of liberall studies so industrious & fruitfully
occupied: but muche more I meruell to consider this, how
Chaucer that the Bishoppes condemnyng and abolishyng al maner of
a right
Englishe bookes and treatises, which might bryng the people
Wick-
leuian.
to any light of knowledge, did yet authorise the woorkes of
Chaucers Chaucer to remayne still & to be occupyed : Who (no doubt)
bokes.
saw in Religion as much almost, as euen we do now, and
vttereth in hys works no lesse, and semeth to be a right
Wicleuian, or els was neuer any, and that all his workes
almost, if they be throughly aduised will testifie (albeit it bee
done in myrth, & couertly) & especially the latter ende of hys
thyrd booke of the Testament of loue: for there purely he
toucheth the highest matter, that is the Communion. Wherin,
excepte a man be altogether blynd, he may espye him at the
full. Althoughe in the same booke (as in all other he vseth
to do) vnder shadows couertly, as vnder a visoure he suborneth
truth, in such sorte, as both priuely she may profite the godly-
minded, and yet not be espyed of the craftye aduersarie. And
therefore the Byshops, belike, takyng hys workes but for iestes
and toyes, in condemnyng other bookes, yet permitted his
bookes to be read.
So it pleased God to blinde then the eyes of them, for the
Men brought  more commoditie of his people, to the entent that through the
to truth readyng of his treatises, some fruite might redound therof to
by read-
ing Chau-  his Churche, as no doubt, it dyd to many: As also I am
cers
workes, partlye informed of certeine, whiche knewe the parties, which
to them reported, that by readyng of Chausers workes, they
were brought to the true knowledge of Religion. And not
unlike to be true. For to omitte other partes of his volume,
whereof some are more fabulous than other, what tale can bee
more playnely tolde, then the talke of the ploughman? or
what finger can pointe out more directly the Pope with his
Prelates to be Antichrist then doth the poore Pellycan reason¬
The
yng agaynst the gredy Griffon? Under whiche Hypotyposis
plough-
or Poesie, who is so blind that seeth not by the Pellicane,
mans
tale in
Chauser.  the doctrine of Christ, and of the Lollardes to bee defended
agaynst the Churche of Rome? Or who is so impudent that
can denye that to be true, which the Pellicans there affirmeth
in describyng the presumptuous pride of that pretensed
[p. 966] Church? Agayne vhat egge can be more lyke, or figge vnto
an other, then ye words, properties, and conditions of that
rauenyng Griphe resembleth the true Image, that is, the
nature & qualities of that which we call the Churche of Rome,
in euery point and degre? and therfore no great maruell, if
that narration was exempted out of the copies of Chaucers
workes : whiche notwithstandyng now is restored agayne, and
is extant, for euery man to read that is disposed. This
Geffray Chauser being borne (as is thought) in Oxfordshire,
& dwellyng in Wodstocke, Iyeth buried in the Churche of
the minster of S. Peter at Westminster, in an Ile on the
South side of the sayd Churche, not far from the doore leading
to the cloyster, and vpon his graue stone first were written
these ii old verses
Galfridus Chauser vates et fama poesis
Maternæ, hac sacra sum tumulatus humo.
Afterward, about the yeare of our Lord 1556, one M.
Brickam, bestowyng more cost vppon his tumbe, did adde
therunto these verses folowyng...
[Here follow Brigham’s lines, q. v. above, p. 94, 1556; and see above, p. 59.]