[1581?] Sidney, Sir Philip. An Apologie for Poetrie, written by the
right noble, vertuous, and learned, Sir Phillip Sidney Knight.
Printed for Henry Olney, 1595, sign. B ii b, D iiib, D iv, Giv, I iv.
(English Reprints, ed. E. Arber, 1869, pp. 21, 34, 51, 62)
[sign. B So in the Italian language, the first that made it aspire
iib. p.
21]
to be a Treasure-house of Science, were the Poets Dante,
Boccace, and Petrarch. So in our English were Gouer and
Chawcer.
After whom, encouraged and delighted with theyr excellent
fore-going, others haue followed, to beautifie our mother tongue,
as wel in the same kinde as in other Arts...
. . . . . . . . . . .
[sign. D See whether wisdome and temperance in Vlisses and
iii b, P.
34]
Diomedes, valure in Achilles, friendship in Nisus, and Eurialus,
[sign. D euen to an ignoraunt man, carry not an apparent shyning: and
iv]
contrarily, the remorse of conscience in Oedipus, the soone
repenting pride in Agamemnon, the selfe-deuouring crueltie
in his Father Atreus, the violence of ambition in the two
Theban brothers, the sowre-sweetnes of reuenge in Medœa,
and to fall lower, the Terentian Gnato, and our Chaucer's
Pandar, so exprest, that we nowe vse their names to signifie
their trades. ....
. . . . . . . . . . .
[sign. G Thirdly, that it [Poetry] is the Nurse of abuse, infecting
iv, p.
51]
vs with many pestilent desires: with a Syrens swectnes,
drawing the mind to the Serpents tayle of sinfull fancy. And
heerein especially, Comedies giue the largest field to erre,
as Chaucer sayth: howe both in other nations and in ours,
before Poets did soften vs, we were full of courage, giuen to
martiall exercises; the pillers of manlyke liberty and not
lulled a sleepe in shady idlenes with Poets pastimes.
. . . . . . . . . .
[sign.I  Chaucer, vndoubtedly did excellently in hys Troylus and
iv. p.
62]
Cresseid; of whom, truly I know not, whether to meruaile
more, either that he in that mistie time could see so clearely, or
that wee in this cleare age, walke so stumblingly after him. Yet
had he great wants, fitte to be forgiuen, in so reuerent antiquity.