[c. 1555.] Stevins, Walter. The conclusions off the astrolabye com¬
pylyd by Geffray Chaucer newlye amendyd. .... Sloane MS.
261, ff. 3-4 30 b, 66.
[For an account of this MS. and evidence as to its date, see the Introduction to the
Treatise on the Astrolabe, by A. E. Brae, 1870, pp. 6-11.]
[fol. 3]
To the reader
WHEN I happenyd to looke vpon the conclusions of the
astrolabie compiled by Geffray Chawcer, and founde
the same corrupte, and false in so many and sondrie places,
that I doubtede whether the rudenes of the worke weare not a
gretter sclaunder to the authour, then trouble and offence to
the readers; I dyd not a Iytell marvell if a booke shoulde come
oute of his handes so imperfite and indigest, whose other workes
weare not onely reckenyd for the best that euer weare sette
fowrth in oure english tonge : but also weare taken for a mani¬
fest argumente of his singuler witte and generalitie in all kindes
of knowledge. Howebeit, when I called to remembrance that
in his proheme he promised to sette fowrth this worke in fyue
partes, wherof weare neuer extante but these two first partes
onely, it made me belyue that either the worke was neuer
[fol. 3 b] fynisshed of the authoure, or els to haue ben corrupted sens by
some other meanes; or what other thinge might be the cause
therof I wiste not. Neuer the lesse vnderstandinge that the
woorke, which before lay as neglected, to the profite of no man
and discourage of many, mighte be tourned to the commoditie
of as manye as herafter showlde happen to trauayle in that parte
of knowledge : I thought it a thinge worth my laboure if I coulde
sette it in better order and frame–which thinge howe I haue
done it, let be theire indifferente iudgemente, which heretofore
haue readen thether settinge forth; or lyst to compare this and
that together, wherin I confesse that besydes the amendinge
of verie many wordes I haue displaced some conclusions, and
in some places wheare the sentences weare imperfite, I haue
supplied and filled them, as necessitie required.—As for some
conclusions I haue altered them, and some haue I cleane put
[fol. 4] oute for vtterlye false and vntrue: as namelye the conclusion
of direction and retrogradaconn of planetes: and the conclu¬
sions to knowe the longitudes of sterres, whether thei be
determinate or indeterminate in the astrolabie. The conclu¬
sion, to knowe with what degree of the sodiacke any planet
ascendeth on the horizonte whether his latitude be north or
sowth; as the meanynge of the same conclusion was most
hardest by reason of the imparfitenes therof so in practise I
fownde him most false, as he shall fynde that Iyst to take the
Iyke paines. Notwithstandinge this haue I doone, not chal¬
lenginge for my selffe, but renuncynge and leauinge to worthie
Chaucer his due praise for this worke, which if it had come
parfite vnto oure handes (no dowbte) woolde haue merited
wonderfull praise. As for me if I haue done any thinge therin
it shall suffice if the louers of wittie Chawcer do accepte my
good will and entente.
Vale.
. . . . . . . . . . .
[fol. 90 b] [Upon the first degree of Aries] Albeit y t in Chaucers
tyme upon the .12. day of March the sonne entred into the
bedde of Aries: yet in oure tyme y u shalt finde that the sonne
entreth therin the .10. day of the same moneth.
. . . . . . . . . . .
[fol. 66] Thus endethe the conclusions of the astrolabye composed by
Geoffrey Chawcer.