
18 Appendix B. [A.D. 1386-
[1386-88.] Froissart, Jehan. Chroniques de France, d'Engleterre,
d’Escoce, de Bretaigne, d’Espaigne, d’Ytalie, de Flandres, et
d’Alemaigne. (Œuvres de Froissart, ed. Kervyn de Lettenhove,
Bruxelles, 1869, tome viii, p. 383.)
Environ le quaremiel [1377] se fist uns secrès trettiés
entre ces François et ces Englès, et deurent li Englès leurs
trettiés porter en Engleterre, et li François en France, cascuns
devers son signeur le roy, et devoient retourner, ou aultre
commis que li roy renvoieroient, à Monstruel-sus-mer, et sus
cel estat furent les trièwes ralongies jusques au premier jour
de may... Si furent envoyet à Monstruel-sus-mer, du costé
des François, li sires de Couci, li sires de le Rivière, messires
Nicolas Brake et Nicolas le Mercier, et du costé des Englès,
messires Guichars d’Angle, messires Richars Sturi et Jeffrois
Cauchiés.
[ante 1445.] D’Orléans, Jean, Comte d’Angoulême. A list of the pil¬
grims in the Canterbury Tales, written in Jean d’Orléans' hand, on
a manuscript of the Canterbury Tales which was among the books
in his library. MSS. Angl. No. 39, Bibl. Nationale, fol. A.
Prologus—Knicht—Millener—Reve—Men of Lau—Clerc
of Oxonford—Wif ot Bathe—Frere—Somneur—Marchant—
Scuier—Franquelin—Fisicien—Pardoner—Chip man—
Prioresse—Chaucer—Monk—Nones priste—Yᵉ Nonne
Chanoines man—Yᵉ manciple.
[Jean d'Orléans (brother of Charles d'Orléans) was given as a hostage to Thomas
of Lancaster, Duke ot Clarence, by the Dukes of Orléans, of Berry, of Bretagne and
Bourbon, in 1412, at the age of 13. He was imprisoned first in London, then at the
Castle of Maxey, and he was only released at the age of 46, in May, 1445, after as
years of captivity. He was passionately fond of books, and he had a library of some
160 manuscripts, 11 of which are copied in his own hand. From the Inventory made
ot his books in 1467 (he died on the 30th April, 1467), it is clear that he was a great
reader and a scholar, that he had learnt English and that he read Chaucer in the
original. For in this Inventory we find a manuscript of the Cauterbury Tales thus
described : “Ung romant, en Anglois, rimé, en papler, commançant, ou premier
fueillet, "want taht aprilh" et finissant, ou penultime, "Aliberons apetite [sic]."
This manuscript is now in the Bibliothèque Nationale with the table of contents in
the handwriting of Jean d’Orléans.
See Jean d'Orléans d'après sa bibliothèque, par G. Dupont-Ferrier, Biblio¬
thèque de la Faculté des Lettres, Paris, 1897, tome iii, p. 64; La Captivité de Jean
d’Orléans, par Q. Dupont-Ferrier, Revue Historique, tome Ixii, 1896; Catalogue des
manuscrits anglais de la Bibliothèque Nationale, par Gaston Raynaud, Paris, 1884.
pp.14-15.]
1674. Moréri, Louis. [Article 'Geofroy' in the] Grand dictionnaire
historique... première édition. [This work was revised and
reprinted in 1681 (q. v.), and many times afterwards.]
[No article under Chaucer. But under Geofroy or Gode¬
froy de Viterbe there is a second paragraph which begins:]
