
FRENCH ALLUSIONS.
[1386?]. Deschamps, Eustache. Ballad addressed to Geoffrey Chaucer
by Deschamps, when sending him his own works. Unique MS.
Bibliothèque nationale, No. 840, fonds français, fol. Ixii, Ixii verso.
Œuvres complètes d’Eustache Deschamps, publiées par le marquis
de Queux de Saint Hilaire, Société des Anciens Textes Français,
vol. ii, 1880, pp. 138-40.
AUTRE BALADE1
O Socrates plains de philosophie
Seneque en meurs et anglux en pratique
Ouides grans en ta poeterie
Bries en parler saiges en rethorique
Aigles treshaulz qui par ta theorique
5
Enlumines le regne deneas
Lisle aux geans ceuls de bruth2 et qui as
Seme les fleurs et plante le rosier
Aux ignorans de la langue pandras3
Grant translateur noble geffroy chaucier
10
1The exact text of the manuscript is here printed. This may be useful, as
it has often been reprinted with different corrections. Thus slight changes
have been made in its text, even in the edition of the Anciens Textes Français,
without due comment. For example :—
line 25
PRINTED TEXT.
line 20, 30
Qui en Gaule
MANUSCRIPT.
Grand
Qui men gaule
line 32
seroye
Grant
seroie.
2 Deschamps obtains the name by which he designates England from the
Brut of Wace; cf. the ballade of Deschamps, Sur les divers noms de l’Angle¬
terre, with the refrain "C’est de ce mot l’interpretacion," Œuvres vi, pp. 87-8;
and De la prophecie de Merlin sur la destruction d’Angleterre qui doit brief
advenir, refrain "Ou temps jadis estoit ci Angleterre," Œuvres ii, pp. 33-4.
La langue pandras–the French language. The idea of this expression
comes also from Wace. Pandras was a mythical king of Greece, who had been
vanquished by Brutus–the first king of Britain (England) according to the
legend–at the head of a certain number of Trojan exiles who had been kept
as slaves by Pandras. When Brutus, with the Trojan victors, landed in
"Albion," he founded the realm of Britain. The language of the inhabitants
of Britain (that of Chaucer) is first of all called Trojan, then "British," i.e. the
language of Brutus. The language of Brutus being English, the language of
Pandras, the enemy of Brutus, must have been French, the language of the
hereditary enemies of England. See an article in the Academy, Nov. 14, 1891,
p. 432, by Dr. Paget Toynbee, on this ballade.
16
