
148 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1894-
enlarged by illustrations due to my own reading during a long
course of years, and by many others due to the labours of the
[p. x] most recent critics. The number of allusions that have been
traced to their origin during the past fifteen years is consider¬
able; and much additional light has thus been thrown upon
Chaucer's method of treating his originals. ...
[p. xviii] As regards the texts, my chief debt is to the Chaucer
Society, which means, practically, Dr. Furnivall, through
whose zeal and energy so many splendid and accurate prints of
the MSS. have been produced, thus rendering the actual read¬
ings and spellings of the scribes accessible to students in all
countries. It is obvious that, but for such work, no edition of
Chaucer could have been attempted without an enormous
increase of labour and a prodigal expenditure of time.
1894. Kittredge, George Lyman. Observations on the Language of
Chaucer's Troilus, Chaucer Society, 1894 [issue for 1891]. (Also
issued as vol. iii of Harvard Studies and Notes in Philology and
Literature, Boston, 1894.)
[A detailed and most valuable linguistic study, based on
the readings of four MSS.: Campsall, Harl. 2280; Camb.,
Gg. 4, 27; and Harl. 3943, all as edited for the Chaucer
Society by Dr. Furnivall. It consists of (1) a Grammatical
Chapter in which the forms occurring in Troilus are recorded
and analysed; and (2) a Metrical Chapter, with special
reference to final e.]
1894. Pollard, Alfred William. See above, Chaucer's Canterbury
Tales.
1894-7. Skeat, Walter William. See above, The Complete Works of
Geoffrey Chaucer.
1895. Ker, William Paton. The Poetry of Chaucer, [review of] The
Complete Works of Geoffrey Chaucer, edited by the Rev. Walter
W. Skeat, [in] The Quarterly Review, April, 1895, vol. clxxx,
pp. 521-48. [The greater part of this article, that which is more
directly concerned with Chaucer's poetry, i. e. pp. 534-47, is re¬
printed, with slight verbal changes and omissions, in Essays on
Medieval Literature, by W. P. Ker, 1905, pp. 76-100.]
[The importance of Skeat's edition. Its supreme merit is
that it has cleared the poems of Chaucer from blunders of
language and rhythm, which in former editions interrupted
the flow of the verse, pp. 521-2. Chaucer's art and versi¬
