
1879] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 123
and if he had not included in the list two or three of the
stories, or not given prologues to the others, Chaucer could
not have survived in our literature. Of course there is a
historical explanation for it all. ... Put at its briefest the
explanation is this: his object was to give Englishmen a
literature bodily, instantly as it were, by transferring into
our tongue, such as he found it and made it, the famous
[p. 282] Our business here is instantly to narrow all we have been
achievements of the great foreign writers. ...
saying into the statement, that with the above exceptions,
Chaucer's writings are a lackadaisical exaggeration of one
feeling—Love, and that in them the passion is taken in its
weakest, vainest form of sentimentality. He is, and for ever
will remain, the chief erotic poet of our language.
1878. Poetical Works of Chaucer, with poems formerly printed with
his, or attributed to him. Edited, with a Memoir, by R. Bell.
Revised edition. ... With a preliminary essay by W. W. Skeat.
4 vols. [A revised edition of that of 1854-6, q.v. above.]
[The introductory essay (vol. i, pp. 1-12) is concerned with
the Chaucer canon. The Testament of Love, Rom. Rose,
Complaint of the Black Knight, Cuckoo and Nightingale,
Flower and the Leaf, Chaucer's Dream (Isle of Ladies), Court
of Love, Virelai, etc., are declared to be spurious. They are
printed in this edition at the end of the genuine works.]
1878. Skeat, Walter William. See above, Poetical Works.
1878. Storr, Francis (the Younger), and Turner, Hawes. Canterbury
Chimes, or Chaucer Tales retold for Children. Illustrated by
woodcuts from the Ellesmere MS.
[A very free rendering, in simple modern English, of Prol.,
and an abridgment of the Knightes, Man of Law's, Nonne
Prestes, Squieres, Frankeleyns and "Chaucer’s" Tales (the last
= Gamelyn, which is purposely inserted instead of Sir Thopas,
as being more suitable; see Preface, p. vi).]
1879-80. The Poetical Works of Chaucer, to which are appended
poems attributed to Chaucer, edited by Arthur Gilman, 3 vols.,
Boston, 1880.
[Gilman's edition of Chaucer is the first considerable use
made, by way of an edition, of the work of Furnivall and
the Chaucer Society. In the case of the Canterbury Tales,
