
1891] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Lounsbury.] 143
With this quaint expression of personal opinion, he passes at
once to the pathetic parting-scene between the dying lover
and the woman for whom he is about to die. Yet these rapid
transitions do not produce upon the mind any effect of inap¬
propriateness or incongruity. Tears and laughter stand side
by side in Chaucer's verse as they do in life ...
[p. 444] I am not claiming for Chaucer that he is one of the few
supremest poets of the race. His station is near them, but he
is not of them. Yet, whatever may be the rank we accord
him among the writers of the world’s chief literatures, the
position he holds in his own literature is one that can no
longer be shaken by criticism or disturbed by denial. ...To
one alone among the writers of our own literature is he
inferior. Nor even by him has he been surpassed in every
way. There are characteristics in which he has no superior,
and, it may be right to add, in which he has no equal. ...
There is one particular in wwhich his merits in reference to the
literature are transcendent. He overcame its natural tendencies
to a dull seriousness which could sometimes be wrought into
vigorous invective, but had little power to fuse the spiritual
element of poetry with the purely intellectual. Into the stolid
English nature, which may be earnest, but evinces an almost
irresistible inclination towards heaviness, he brought a light¬
ness, a grace, a delicacy of fancy, a refined sportiveness even
upon the most unrefined themes which had never been known
[p. 445] before save on the most infinitesimal scale, and has not been
known too much since.
Nor is this the only distinctive characteristic in which
Chaucer excels. There is no other English author so absolutely
free, not merely from effort, but from the remotest suggestion
of effort. Shakspeare mounts far higher; yet with him
there are times when we seem to hear the flapping of the
wings, to be vaguely conscious that he is lashing his imagina¬
tion to put forth increased exertions. But in Chaucer no
slightest trace of strain is to be detected. As on the lower levels
the line never labours, so on the higher he never makes the
impression that he is trying to make an impression. It is the
absolute ease with which he rises that often prevents our per¬
ceiving how rapidly he has risen. ... Nor is it alone for the
naturalness and ease which result from this union of strength
