
1880] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Arnold.] 129
great classics. He has not their accent. What is wanting to
him is suggested by the mere mention of the name of the first
great classic of Christendom, the immortal poet who died
eighty years before Chaucer,—Dante. The accent of such
verse as
"In la sua volontade è nostra pace ..."1
is altogether beyond Chaucer's reach; we praise him, but we
feel that this accent is out of the question for him. It may be
said that it was necessarily out of the reach of any poet in
the England of that stage of growth. Possibly; but we are to
adopt a real, not a historic, estimate of poetry. However, we
may account for its absence, something is wanting, then, to
the poetry of Chaucer, which poetry must have before it can
be placed in the glorious class of the best. And there is no
doubt what that something is. It is the σπουδαιότης, the
high and excellent seriousness which Aristotle assigns as one
[p.
xxxv]
of the grand virtues of poetry. The substance of Chaucer's
poetry, his view of things and his criticism of life, has
largeness, freedom, shrewdness, benignity; but it has not
this high seriousness. Homer's criticism of life has it,
Dante's has it, Shakespeare's has it. It is this chiefly
which gives to our spirits what they can rest upon; and with
the increasing demands of our modern ages upon poetry, this
virtue of giving us what we can rest upon will be more and
more highly esteemed. A voice from the slums of Paris, fifty
or sixty years after Chaucer, the voice of poor Villon out of
his life of riot and crime, has at its happy moments (as, for
instance, in the last stanza of La Belle Heaulmière) more of
this important poetic virtue of seriousness than all the pro¬
ductions of Chaucer. But its apparition in Villon, and in
men like Villon, is fitful; the greatness of the great poets,
the power of their criticism of life, is that their virtue is
sustained.
To our praise, therefore, of Chaucer as a poet there must be
this limitation; he lacks the high seriousness of the great
classics, and therefore an important part of their virtue.
Still, the main fact for us to bear in mind about Chaucer is
his sterling value according to that real estimate which we
1 So quoted by Arnold; the original (Paradiso, iii, 86) reads: E la sua volontate ...
CHAUCER CRITICISM.—III.
EE
