
1900] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 151
and history of the edition, its abortive undertaking by Henry
[Mr. Pollard in the Preface gives an account of the genesis
Bradshaw (see above, 1864, Works), Aldis Wright, Skeat, and
Furnivall, and its relation to the "library edition," ultimately
edited by Skeat in 1894 (q.v.). The Introduction consists of
a cautious biography setting out only the known external
facts of Chaucer's life, followed by a more tentative chrono¬
logical account of his writings. Special introductions by the
various responsible editors then precede the text.]
1898. Pollard, Alfred William; Heath, Sir Henry Frank; Liddell,
Mark Harvey; McCormick, Sir William Symington. See supra:
The Works of Geoffrey Chaucer (Globe edition).
1900. Skeat, Walter William. The Chaucer Canon, with a discussion
of the works associated with the name of Geoffrey Chaucer.
[The argument starts from the admitted genuineness of the
Canterbury Tales; Chaucer's grammatical practice in the
Squieres Tale, and that of the Ormulum and the metre and
rhyme-tests of the Tales are analysed; the conclusions are
applied to the poems of whose genuineness there is external
testimony, and then in succession to the non-Chaucerian
pieces printed by Thynne, Stowe, Speght, Urry, etc.]
[p. v] Much that is here said is necessarily repeated from what I
have already advanced in my six volume edition of Chaucer
and in the supplementary volume entitled Chaucerian Pieces;
but, [with other new matter] ... the account here given of
the striking parallel between Chaucer's grammatical usages
and the regular employment of various grammatical suffixes
in the unassailable text of the Ormulum is, to the best of my
belief, wholly new, and adds much firmness and certainty to
the whole argument. ...
The argument which I adduce is briefly this. The extreme
regularity of the metre of the Ormulum enables us to deduce
[p. vi] with certainty the circumstances under which grammatical
inflexions are employed in it. Precisely similar inflexions
occur in the genuine works of Chaucer, but not (speaking
generally) in works which have erroneously been connected
with his name.
Further, the genuine works, and these only, satisfy various
rime-tests which are duly explained, and are all deducible
from the Canterbury Tales; and in this way the true Chaucer
Canon can be established.
