
150 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1896-
alliance of tragedy and comedy which makes an end of all
the old distinctions and limitations of narrative and drama.
and proportion of Troilus, pp. 539-40. The Knightes Tale
[Troilus and the Filostrato, pp. 538-9. The dignity, beauty
and the Teseide, pp. 540-1. Chaucer's different handling of
the Troilus and Knightes Tale themes, pp. 541-3. Chaucer's
changes of handling throughout his works, p. 543. The
House of Fame an indulgence in mediæval vanities, pp. 544-5.
Contradictions and problems of the Canterbury Tales, pp.
544-7.]
1896. The Works of Geoffrey Chaucer, now newly imprinted.
Edited by F. S. Ellis; ornamented with pictures designed by Sir
Edward Burne-Jones, and engraved on wood by W. H. Hooper.
Printed by me, William Morris, at the Kelmscott Press, Hammer¬
smith, 1896.
[The great folio 'Kelmscott Chaucer.' It took three years
and four months to prepare and execute, the printing alone
occupying a year and nine months. It has 87 pictures by
Burne-Jones; and, in addition, a full page woodcut title,
14 large borders, 18 borders for the pictures, and 26 large
initial words, as well as ornamental initial letters, all designed
by William Morris. See The Life of William Morris, by
J. W. Mackail, 1899, vol ii, chaps. xx, xxi.]
1896. Morris, William; Ellis, F. S.; Burne-Jones, Sir Edward;
Hooper, W. H. See supra: The Works of Geoffrey Chaucer
('Kelmscott Chaucer').
1898. The Works of Geoffrey Chaucer, edited by Alfred W. Pollard,
H. Frank Heath, Mark H. Liddell, W. S. McCormick. (The
Globe Edition.)
[p. ix] [Preface by A. W. Pollard.]
In the division of labour ... I have myself remained
responsible for the Canterbury Tales, the Legende of Good
Women, the Glossary, and the General Introduction;
Professor Liddell has taken the Boece, the Treatise on the
Astrolabe, and the Romaunt of the Rose; Professor
McCormick, Troilus and Criseyde; Dr. Heath, the Hous of
Fame, Parlement of Foules, and all the shorter pieces. ...
We [the editors] all believe that in the present state of our
knowledge the most conservative treatment, consistent with
the necessities of common sense and the known rules of
Chaucerian usage, is also the best.
