
142 [Lounsbury.] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1891
There have been many men of genius who have been able to
say grand things grandly. To the fewest of the few is re¬
served the achievement of the far harder task of discoursing
of mean things without discoursing meanly; of recounting the
prosaic events of life without becoming prosaic one's self; of nar¬
rating them in the plainest terms, and yet investing them with a
poetic charm. It is in the power of genius only to accomplish
this at all; but it is by no means in the power of all genius.
[p. 442] It is because he stayed so persistently on these low levels
that Chaucer was enabled to combine with apparent ease
characteristics and methods that are often deemed incompatible.
His words are the more effective because their very simplicity
makes upon the mind the impression of understatement. The
imagination of the reader fills in and exaggerates the details
which have been left half-told. It is owing to this restraint
of expression that whatever he says is not only at all times
and in all places free from literary vulgarity, it never loses the
dignity that belongs, as well in letters as in life, to consum¬
mate high-breeding. There is an exquisite urbanity in his
manner which gives it attractiveness as pervasive and yet as
indefinable as that which the subtle evanescent flavour of arch
allusion imparts to his matter. I do not mean by this to
convey the idea that Chaucer abounds in ornate and brilliant
passages, or that he is constantly saying remarkable things in
a remarkable way. It is simply that in dealing with the
common he is never common-place. ... As a further result
of this absolute naturalness, he is enabled to pass from the
gravest to the lightest topics without giving the reader the
[p. 443] slightest sensation of shock. ... His freedom, indeed, verges
at times upon audacity. In the Knight's tale, for illustration,
following close upon the high-wrought description of the great
tournament comes the recital of the methods taken by the
physicians to save the life of the victor in the struggle. The
failure they meet with is told in the simplest terms. Their
efforts were fruitless because they received no help from nature.
Suddenly the poet interposes his own comment on the useless¬
ness, under such conditions, of the medical art in words like
these :—
"And certainly there nature will not wirche
Farewell, physic! Go! bear the man to church!"
