
146 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1894
the projected Library Edition and as to the treatment of the
text, the editor outlines Chaucer's progress from slavish trans¬
lation in the early Second Nonnes Tale, through the Clerkes
Tale, Troilus and Knightes Tale, to complete freedom from his
source or analogue in his latest work, such as the Prioresses,
Reves and Pardoneres Tales.]
1894-97. The Complete Works of Geoffrey Chaucer. Edited ...
by ... W. W. Skeat, 7 vols.
[The chief contents are: Vol. I, Life of Chaucer, etc.;
Romaunt of the Rose and Minor Poems, with introductions
and notes. (See also vol. iv below, for additions to Minor
Poems.)
Vol. II: Boethius and Troilus, with introductions and
notes.
Vol. III: House of Fame; Legend of Good Women;
Astrolabe, with introductions and notes. An Account of the
Sources of the Canterbury Tales.
Vol. IV: The Canterbury Tales, in groups A to I, with
the Tale of Gamelyn as an appendix; Introduction on the
MSS. and the plan of the Tales adopted. The Introduction
contains also three Minor Poems additional to those in vol. i.
Vol. V: Notes to the Canterbury Tales, with an Intro¬
duction on the Chaucer Canon; the earlier editions; the
Text of the Canterbury Tales; Chaucer's scansion, accentu¬
ation and pronunciation; with rules for reading and a note on
modernised spelling.
Vol. VI: General Introduction, discussing the texts of the
various pieces; the editor’s obligations to others; the dialect
of Chaucer; his Kenticisms; pronunciation; scansion and
accents; open and close o and e, etc.; rime; assonances; final
y and ye; metres and forms of verse; analysis of Chaucer's
language and grammar; versification; his authorities. Glos¬
saries, indices, etc.
Vol. VII (Supplementary Volume), Chaucerian and other
Pieces, contains:
Introduction on the (selected) apocryphal pieces, generally
and individually, and the texts as follows, concluding with
indices, etc.:
I. Testament of Love (Usk).
II. Plowman’s Tale.
III. Jack Upland.
IV. Gower's Praise of Peace.
V. Hoccleve’s Letter of Cupid.
