
1883] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 133
1881. Poole, Henry. Westminster Abbey: A Study on Poets' Corner,
[in] The Antiquary, October 1881, vol. iv, pp. 137, 139.
[p. 139] Having alluded to the probability that the table-tomb of
Chaucer was once against the screen of St. Benedict’s Chapel,
it may not be inopportune here to follow out the probable
story of it.
The tomb proper is evidently due to the period of the death
of Chaucer. Its quatre-foils bear his shield of arms, and
around at least three of the sides with [sic] the verge moulding,
wvhich probably bore a painted inscription. In 1556, there
was perhaps some necessity for totally removing the tomb, of
which advantage was taken by Chaucer's admirer, Nicholas
Brigham, to place it where it now is, and add to it a handsome,
though debased, canopy of Purbeck marble, and also a similar
marble slab, with a new inscription in Latin, that of the
marble table having become decayed and illegible. This slab
has undergone great decay and disintegration, so much so as
to almost totally obscure the inscription, as reported by Neale
in 1823 [or rather by E. W. Brayley in his History and
Antiquities of the Abbey Church of St. Peter, Westminster,
illustrated by J. P. Neale, 1818-23, vol. ii, 1823, q.v. above].
Fifty years' more disintegration followed with still further
obscuration, when the writer closely scrutinized and cleansed
the slab, discovering traces of all the letters but four.
Without any attempt to strengthen the engraving, the lettering
was developed by painting all the remaining traces with gold¬
coloured paint, and with the same pigment reproducing the
four absent letters; and now the inscription of 1558 is quite
distinct and perfectly durable.
The table of the tomb has lately been fully cleansed of dirt
and adhesions, beneath which the moulding, as well as much
of the surface, was found still to retain its original polish,
which the adhesion had preserved. Now the table displays
a fine specimen of the best Purbeck marble, which need never
become dull again.
1883. Coote, Henry Charles. Chaucer's Ten-Syllable Verse, [in] The
Antiquary, July 1883, vol. viii, pp. 5-8.
[p. 5] Chaucer's Troilus was not only the first heroic poem and
the first real display of poetic genius in the language of
mediæval England, but was the starting-point and departure
