
1877] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 121
1876. Haweis, Mary Eliza. Chaucer for Children ... illustrated
with eight coloured pictures, and numerous woodcuts by the
Author, 1877.
[Published late in 1876.]
[With a preface "To the Mother" on the reading and
pronunciation of Chaucer, followed by a biographical sketch,
"Chaucer the Tale Teller." Abridged stories from Prol.,
Knightes, Friers, Clerkes, Frankeleyns and Pardoneres Tales,
Complaint to his Purse, Two Rondeaux (Your yën two and
Sin I fro Love), Virelai and Good Counsel, follow in original
and modernised form with connecting summary.]
1876. Minto, William. Chaucer, [in] Encyclopædia Britannica,
ninth edition. See above, 1778, Unknown, vol. i, p. 452.
1877. Fleay, F. G. Guide to Chaucer and Spenser. [One of Collins'
School and College Classics.]
[The section given to Chaucer occupies pp. 1-72, and in
this short space is contained a summary of the latest critical
knowledge of his life, sources, language, works and their
chronology, arrangement of the Tales (in two days instead of
four), etc. Fleay rejects the rhyme-test of y, ye, and the
conclusions as to authenticity of poems founded on it,
retaining e. g. 'Chaucer’s Dream' (the Isle of Ladies), and also
disbelieves in Chaucer’s early unhappy love, interpreting his
'sickness' as married life.]
[p. 10] Of the practicability of acquiring it [a sound acquaintance
with Chaucer] at the age of thirteen or thereabouts, I have
had many proofs among my own pupils, from the time when
I first introduced English literature as a specific subject of
education in our grammar schools, now twenty years ago.
The methods I was then almost, if not quite, alone in using,
are now in general practice.
1877. Green, John Richard. Letters to Dr. F. J. Furnivall, [the first
undated, the second dated] March 12, 1877 [in the possession of
Mr. Percy Furnivall].
[1] Anent the Chaucer, I hope our talk cleared your mind
into hopefulness and a practical view of things. What we
really want ('we' being the would-be-intelligent-readers-of-
Chaucer) is simply (1) Sketch of Early English poetry afore
him to bring out the great step he made. (2) His life
with what pictures of men’s ways and manners in his day
