
1891] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 141
Vol. I. Chapter IV.—The Writings of Chaucer.
Vol. II. Chapter IV. (continued).—The Romance of the Rose.
" Chapter V.—The Learning of Chaucer.
" Chapter VI.—The Relations of Chaucer to the English
Language and to the Religion of his
Time.
Vol. III. Chapter VII.—Chaucer in Literary History.
" Chapter VIII.—Chaucer as a Literary Artist.
" Appendix.
[Vol. iii, I have sought to show that Chaucer was not only a great
p. 439]
artist, but that he became so at the cost of time and labour;
that in him, standing at the fountain-head of English litera¬
ture, the critical spirit was as highly developed as the creative.
... If we need further confirmation, we can find it in one
marked change that took place in his literary methods. In
his earlier work he introduces constantly characters that are
merely personifications of qualities or acts or sentiments.
In so doing he followed the practice of his immediate pre¬
decessors. As he advanced in knowledge and taste he shook
himself free from the trammels of this temporary fashion. He
abandoned almost entirely the field of abstractions in which
the men of his time delighted, and in which his contemporary
Langland was contented to remain. For the shadowy beings
who dwell in the land of types he substituted living men and
women; for the allegorical representations of feelings and
beliefs, the direct outpourings of passion. Changes of method
such as these are not the result of freak or accident. Chaucer,
accordingly, must stand or fall not merely by our opinion of
what he did, but by our knowledge that what he did was done
consciously. ...
It is impossible to take final leave of the poet without some
notice of what is on the whole the most pronounced character¬
[p. 441] istic of his style. This is the uniformly low level upon which
he moves. There is no other author in our tongue who has
clung so closely and so persistently to the language of common
life. Such a characteristic appealed strongly to the men who
led the revolt against the artificial diction that prevailed in
the poetry of the last century. It attracted in particular the
attention of Wordsworth. The course of his predecessor he
cited as an authority for the one which he himself adopted. ...
