
1887] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 137
[prose writers] is, as a rule, final. ... How different has
[p. 107] been the fate of poets! Take Chaucer. In 1500 his
popularity was at its height. During the latter part of the
sixteenth century it began to decline. From that date till the
end of William III's reign—in spite of the influence which
he undoubtedly exercised over Spenser, and in spite of the
respectful allusions to him in Sidney, Puttenham, Drayton,
and Milton—his fame had become rather a tradition than a
reality. In the following age the good-natured tolerance of
Dryden was succeeded by the contempt of Addison and the
supercilious patronage of Pope. Between 1700 and 1782
nothing seemed more probable than that the writings of the
first of England’s narrative poets would live chiefly in the
memory of antiquarians. In little more than half a century
afterwards we find him placed, with Shakespeare and Milton,
on the highest pinnacle of poetic renown.
1887. Marshall, Isabel, Porter, Lela, and Skeat, Walter William.
Ryme Index to the Manuscript Texts of Chaucer's Minor Poems.
By Miss I. Marshall and Miss L. Porter. With an introduction
and an appendix of ryme-indexes to some spurious poems ... by
W. W. Skeat.
[For use with the Parallel-Text edition, Chaucer Society, and reissued in 1889 for
use with the One-Text edition.]
1887. Morris. William. Feudal England, [in] The Commonweal,
nos. 84-87. [Reprinted, with slight alterations (as Lecture 3), in
Signs of Change, 1887, pp. 73-5.]
[No.87,
[The central period of the Middle Ages in England] has a
p. 282]
literature of its own too, somewhat akin to its art, yet inferior
to it, and lacking its unity, since there is a double stream
in it. On the one hand the Court poet, the Gentleman,
Chaucer, with his Italianizing metres, and his formal recog¬
nition ot the classical stories; on which, indeed, he builds a
superstructure of the quaintest and most unadulterated
mediævalism, as gay and bright as the architecture which
his eyes beheld and his pen pictured for us, so clear, defined
and elegant; a sunny world even amidst its violence and
passing troubles, like those of a happy child, the worst of
them are amusement rather than a grief to the onlookers;
a world that scarcely needed hope in its eager life of adventure
and love, amidst the sunlit blossoming meadows, and green
