
138 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1887-
woods and white begilded manor-houses. A kindly and
human muse is Chaucer’s, nevertheless, interested in and
amused by all life, but of her very nature devoid of strong
aspirations for the future; and that all the more, since,
though the strong devotion and fierce piety ot the ruder Middle
Ages had by this time waned, and the Church was more often
lightly mocked than either feared or loved, still the habit
ot looking on this life as part of another yet remained: the
world is fair and full of adventure; kind men and true and
noble are in it to make one happy; fools also to laugh at, and
rascals to be resisted, yet not wholly condemned; and when
this world is over we shall still go on living in another which
is a part of this. Of this picture, note all and be as merry
as you may, never forgetting that you are alive and that it
is good to live.
That is the spirit of Chaucer's poetry; but alongside of it
existed yet the ballad poetry of the people ... [and what]
you may call Lollard poetry, the great example of which is
William Langland’s "Piers Plowman." It is no bad cor¬
rective to Chaucer, and in form at least belongs wholly to the
popular side.
[For Skeat see below, 1888.]
1887. Stevenson, Robert Louis. A Portrait, [in] Underwoods. (Works,
Edinburgh Edition, 1894-8, 28 vols., vol. xiv, p. 123.)
I am "the smiler with the knife"...
1888. Furnivall, Frederick James. Note, [in] The Academy, Dec. 22,
1888, Notes and News, vol. xxxiv, p. 403.
Dr. Furnivall writes:
"May I appeal through you for two volunteer editors for
the Chaucer Society? ... I want (1) somebody with access
to a large library, to compile 'The Praise of Chaucer'—all
allusions to him from his own day to (say) Dryden, and the
chief ones since; and (2) a history and record man to write
an 'England in Chaucer’s Time' (1300-1400)—a better
Godwin. ... The 'England in Chaucer’s Time' would form
a good foundation for an after 'History of England in the
Fourteenth Century'—a book much wanted."
[The present work attempts to fulfil, and in some respects exceeds, the first of
these ideals laid down by Dr. Furnivall.]
