
130 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1880
firmly adopt for all poets. He has poetic truth of substance
though he has not high poetic seriousness, and corresponding
to his truth of substance he has an exquisite virtue of style
and manner. With him is born our real poetry. ...
The age of Dryden, together with our whole eighteenth
century which followed it, sincerely believed itself to have
produced poetical classics of its own, and even to have made
advance, in poetry, beyond all its predecessors. Dryden
regards as not seriously disputable the opinion 'that the
sweetness of English verse was never understood or practised
by our fathers.'1 Cowley could see nothing at all in Chaucer's
poetry. Dryden heartily admired it, and, as we have seen,
praised its matter admirably; but of its exquisite manner and
movement all he can find to say is that 'there is the rude
sweetness of a Scotch tune in it, which is natural and pleasing,
though not perfect.' Addison, wishing to praise Chaucer's
numbers, compares them with Dryden's own. And all through
the eighteenth century, and down even to our own times, the
stereotyped phrase of approbation for good verse found in our
early poetry has been, that it even approached the verse of
Dryden, Addison, Pope and Johnson. ...
[p. xliv] Burns, like Chaucer, comes short of the high seriousness of
the great classics. ... Yet we may say of him [Burns], as of
Chaucer, that of life and the world, as they come before
[p. xlv] him, his view is large, free, shrewd, benignant,—truly poetic,
therefore; and his manner of rendering what he sees is to
match. But we must note, at the same time, his great differ¬
ence from Chaucer. The freedom of Chaucer is heightened in
Burns, by a fiery, reckless energy; the benignity of Chaucer
deepens, in Burns, into an overwhelming sense of the pathos
of things;—of the pathos of human nature, the pathos, also,
of non-human nature. Instead of the fluidity of Chaucer's
manner, the manner of Burns has spring, bounding swiftness.
Burns is by far the greater force, though he has perhaps
less charm. The world of Chaucer is fairer, richer, more
significant than that of Burns.
1 [Note (unpublished) added by Dr. Furnivall :] We must recollect that, till
Tyrwhitt, no decent edition of the Canterbury Tales was accessible, and till Richard
Morris, none of the Minor Poems. So long as printers and editors disregarded
Chaucer's final e and printed as his, pieces that he never wrote, it was impossible
for any readers to appreciate his poetic powers.—F. J. F.
