
1880] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 131
1880. Swinburne, Algernon Charles. Short Notes on English Poets,
Chaucer, Spenser, the Sonnets of Shakespeare, Milton, [in] The
Fortnightly Review, 1880, pp. 708-10. [Reprinted in Mis¬
cellanies, 1886, pp. 2-6, 88, 150, 152, 175.]
[Mr. W. Rossetti, in his Lives of Famous Poets, has selected
four of our poets "as composing the supreme quadrilateral of
English song."]
[p.2] It is through no lack of love and reverence for the name of
Chaucer that I must question his right, though the first
narrative poet of England, to stand on that account beside
her first dramatic, her first epic, or her first lyric poet. But,
being certainly unprepared to admit his equality with Shake¬
speare, with Milton, and with Shelley, I would reduce Mr.
Rossetti's mystic four to the old sacred number of three.
Pure or mere narrative is a form essentially and avowedly
inferior to the Iyrical or the dramatic form of poetry; and
the finer line of distinction which marks it off from the epic
marks it also thereby as inferior.
Of all whose names may claim anything like equality of
rank on the roll of national poets—not even excepting Virgil—
we may say that Chaucer borrowed most from abroad, and did
most to improve whatever he borrowed. I believe it would
be but accurate to admit that in all his poems of serious or
tragic narrative we hear a French or Italian tongue speaking
with a Teutonic accent through English lips. It has utterly
unlearnt the native tone and cadence of its natural inflections;
it has perfectly put on the native tone and cadence of a
stranger's; yet it is always what it was at first—lingua
romana in bocca tedesca. It speaks not only with more
vigour but actually with more swectness than the tongues of
its teachers; but it speaks after its own fashion no other
[p. 3] than the lesson they have taught. Chaucer was in the main
a French or Italian poet, lined thoroughly and warmly
throughout with the substance of an English humourist. And
with this great gift of specially English humour he combined,
naturally as it were and inevitably, the inseparable twin-born
gift of peculiarly English pathos. ... Dante represents,
at its best and highest, the upper class of the dark ages
not less than he represents their Italy; Chaucer repre¬
sents their middle class at its best and wisest, not less
than he represents their England; Villon represents their
