
1880] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 127
superiority is both in the substance of his poetry and in the
[p.
style of his poetry. His superiority in substance is given by
xxxii]
his large, free, simple, clear yet kindly view of human life,—
so unlike the total want, in the romance-poets, of all intelli¬
gent command of it. Chaucer has not their helplessness; he
has gained the power to survey the world from a central, a
truly human point of view. We have only to call to mind
the Prologue of The Canterbury Tales. The right comment
upon it is Dryden's 'It is sufficient to say, according to the
proverb, that here is God’s plenty.' And again: 'He is a
perpetual fountain of good sense.' It is by a large, free,
sound representation of things, that poetry, this high criticism
of life, has truth of substance.
Of his style and manner, if we think first of the romance-
poetry and then of Chaucer's divine liquidness of diction, his
divine fluidity of movement, it is difficult to speak temperately.
They are irresistible, and justify all the rapture with which
his successors speak of his "gold dewdrops of speech."
Johnson misses the point entirely when he finds fault with
Dryden for ascribing to Chaucer the first refinement of our
numbers, and says that Gower can also show smooth numbers
and easy rhymes. The refinement of our numbers means
something far more than this. A nation may have versifiers
with smooth numbers and easy rhymes, and yet may have
no real poetry at all. Chaucer is the father of our splendid
English poetry; he is our 'well of English undefiled,' because
by the lovely charm of his diction, the lovely charm of his
movement, he makes an epoch and founds a tradition. In
Spenser, Shakespeare, Milton, Keats, we can follow the
tradition of the liquid diction, the fluid movement, of
Chaucer; at one time it is his liquid diction of which in these
poets we feel the virtue, and at another time it is his fluid
movement. And the virtue is irresistible.
[p.
... I must yet find room for an example of Chaucer's
xxxiii]
virtue. ... I feel disposed to say that a single line is enough
to show the charm of Chaucer's verse; that merely one line
like this—
'O martyr souded1 in virginitee!'
has a virtue of manner and movement such as we shall not
1[Arnold's note:] The French soudé; soldered, fixed fast.
