
144 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1892-
and simplicity that the greatest of his successors have delighted
to honour the poet. Full as willingly have they paid homage
to the qualities of character displayed in his works as to those
of intellect; in perfect serenity of spirit as well as in perfect
sanity of view; in the large-hearted toleration which could
[p. 446] not speak bitterly even of the vicious; in the gracious worldli¬
ness which never hardened into the callousness of insensibility;
in the manly tenderness which never degenerated into senti¬
mentality; in the repose of conscious strength which never
wearied itself or worried itself in striving for effect;—in all
these characteristics the royal line of English poets has never
refused to acknowledge the supremacy of him whom it
recognizes as its founder.
1892. Kittredge, George Lyman. The Authorship of the English
Romaunt of the Rose, [in] Harvard Studies and Notes in Philology
and Literature, Boston, Mass., 1892, vol. i, pp. 1-65.
[A detailed examination and rejection of Lounsbury’s claim
that the M. E. Romaunt is Chaucer's, in his Studies in Chaucer,
q.v. above, 1891. Professor Kittredge says in conclusion:]
[p. 65] The affirmative evidence brought forward by Mr. Lounsbury,
when reduced to its lowest terms, we have found to be
entirely consistent with the belief that the translation is not
by Chaucer, but by an imitator. The negative evidence, on
the other hand, from dialect, grammar, and metre, if it does
not show conclusively that Chaucer and the translator were
two persons, still creates the strongest kind of probability in
favour of that supposition. We must therefore be allowed to
prefer the theory that is in accordance with all the facts to the
theory that is strongly opposed to the most significant of them,
and to believe that the Romaunt is not Chaucer's, with the
possible exception of the first seventeen hundred lines.
1893. Pollard, Alfred William. Chaucer, [one of the] Literature
Primers, edited by J. R. Green.
[Dr. Furnivall was originally invited to write the Primer
on Chaucer for this series: see above, Green, 1877. In the
little book, as finally written by Mr. Pollard, the chapters
are: Introduction; Chaucer, the King’s Servant; Chaucer,
the Student; The Contents and Order of Chaucer's Writings
(also the Canon); Poems of Chaucer's First Period; Poems
of Chaucer's Second Period—Chaucer at work on Italian
