
132 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1881-
lower class at its worst and its best alike even more
than he represents their France. And of these three the
English middle class, being incomparably the happiest and
wisest, is indisputably, considering the common circumstances
of their successive times, the least likely to have left us the
highest example of all poetry then possible to men. And of
their three legacies, precious and wonderful as it is, the
Englishman’s is accordingly the least wonderful and the least
precious. The poet of the sensible and prosperous middle
class in England had less to suffer and to sing than the
theosophic aristocrat of Italy, or the hunted and hungry
vagabond. ...
[p. 5] But in happy perfection of manhood the great and
fortunate Englishman almost more exceeds his great and
unfortunate fellow-singers than he is exceeded by them in
depth of passion and height of rapture, in ardour and intensity
of vision or of sense. With the single and sublimer
exception of Sophocles, he seems to me the happiest of all
great poets on record; their standing type and sovereign
example of noble and manly happiness.
[p. 152] [Comparison between Chaucer and Wordsworth. Chaucer
superior in breadth of human interest, in simplicity of varied
sympathies, in straightforward and superb command of his
materials as an artist, in warmth and wealth of humour, in
consummate power of narrative and in childlike manfulness of
compassionate or joyous emotion; but Wordsworth’s sublimity
is worth all the rest put together.]
[This last paragraph was added in 1886.]
1881. Braddon, Mary Elizabeth (Mrs. Maxwell). Asphodel, 3 vols.
[Miss Braddon took all the chapter headings of this novel
from Chaucer.]
["The reason of these quotations was this. Miss Braddon's 'Vixen' came out
serially; and week by week in the dull London winter brought the beautiful
wilful beroine hunting in the New Forest and loving her horses and hounds as
a fresh bright scene to one reader, F. J. Furnivall. He delighted in the book,
and told Mrs. Maxwell so with enthusiasm. She asked him to visit her at Richmond,
and afterwards, meaning to please him, a Chaucer and Shakspere man, put the above
Chaucer headings to the chapters in her next novel, and laid several of its scenes by
Avonside near Stratford. When the work was published, she sent a copy to Dr.
Furnivall, and he, not knowing the kind intent of it, was shocked to find its charming
heroine Daphne, made to commit suicide at the end. So, in his letter of thanks to
the generous authoress, he accused her of being a murderess, for killing his favourite
character. Then Mrs. Maxwell heaped coals of fire on his head by telling him how
she had tried to please him, and how he ought to have seen from the first that
Daphne's sad end was inevitable, and was prepared for from her first appearance.
Whereupon he repented, and apologized." F. J. F]
