
1879] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 125
recommend him to patrons so many and so various, and to
make him the useful and trustworthy agent that he evidently
became for confidential missions abroad. ... To us, of course,
this quality of modesty in Chaucer makes itself principally
manifest in the opinion which he incidentally shows himself
to entertain concerning his own rank and claims as an author.
Herein, as in many other points, a contrast is noticeable
between him and the great Italian masters, who were so
sensitive as to the esteem in which they and their poetry
were held. Chaucer again and again disclaims all boasts of
[p. 147] perfection, or pretensions to pre-eminence, as a poet. . . .
He acknowledges as incontestable the superiority of the
poets of classical antiquity.
[p. 179] Closely allied to Chaucer’s liveliness and gaiety of dis¬
position, and in part springing from them, are his keen sense
of the ridiculous and the power of satire which he has at his
command. His humour has many varieties, ranging from
the refined and half-melancholy irony of the House of Fame
[p. 180] to the ready wit of the sagacious uncle of Cressid, the burl¬
esque fun of the inimitable Nun's Priest's Tale, and the very
gross salt of the Reeve, the Miller, and one or two others. . . .
Concerning, however, Chaucer’s use of the power which he in
so large a measure possessed, viz. that of covering with ridi¬
cule the palpable vices or weaknesses of the classes or
kinds of men represented by some of his character-types,
one assertion may be made with tolerable safety. Whatever
may have been the first stimulus and the ultimate scope of
the wit and humour which he here expended, they are not
to be explained as moral indignation in disguise. And in
truth Chaucer's merriment flows spontaneously from a
source very near the surface; he is so extremely diverting,
because he is so extremely diverted himself.
Herein, too, lies the harmlessness of Chaucer's fun. Its
harmlessness, to wit, for those who are able to read him in
something like the spirit in which he wrote. ...
[p. 181] But the realism of Chaucer is something more than exuber¬
ant love of fun and light-hearted gaiety. He is the first
great painter of character, because he is the first great
observer of it among European writers. . . . More especially
with regard to the manners and ways of women, which
