
1884] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 135
An aesthete was there as I schell you tell,
that hadde of artë lernèd every del;
of Michael-Ange and Raffael and Giote
he couldë glosen of hem al by rote.
. . . . . . . .
A Schipman was there eke, a bote captáin
that woldë souffre mochel toil and payne
teachand the freschë clerkes howe to rowe,
[etc.].
1883. Koch, John. A Critical Edition of some of Chaucer's 'Minor
Poems,' Berlin.
[An introduction treating of the orthography, etc., of the
early MSS. of Chaucer's Works is followed by a collated text
of I. An ABC. II. Chaucers Wordes vnto Adam, his owen
Scriveyn. III. The Former Age. IV. Fortune. V. Truth.
VI. Gentilesse. VII. Lack of Stedfastnesse. VIII. Lenvoy
de Chaucer a Bukton. IX. Lenvoy de Chaucer a Scogan.
X. La Compleinte de Chaucer a sa Bourse Voide; followed
by notes on each.]
1884. à Beckett, Gilbert Arthur, and Stanford, Sir Charles Villiers.
The Canterbury Pilgrims, Opera in 3 Acts, written by Gilbert à
Beckett, composed by C. Villiers Stanford.
[The scene of the 1st Act is the exterior of the Tabard
Inn, Southwark, at close of the 14th century. The characters
include Sir Christopher Synge, a knight of the shire, Geoffry
Blount, the Host of the Tabard, his wife and daughter and
apprentice, two other apprentices and Hal o' the Chepe.
In Act i, sc. 3, the Pilgrims enter in twos and threes slowly
assembling, the Merchant, Clerk, Doctor of Physick, etc.,
all with appropriate music.
This opera, written for the Carl Rosa Company, was first
performed at Drury Lane, on Wednesday, April 23rd, 1884.]
1884. Pitt-Taylor, Frank. The Canterbury Tales; being selections
from the Tales of Geoffrey Chaucer rendered into Modern English
with close adherence to the Language of the Poet.
[Brief Preface, followed by modernizations of the Prologue
and Tales by the Knight, Man of Law, Prioress, Monk,
Nun's Priest, Doctor, Pardoner, Wife of Bath, Clerk, Second
Nun, Canon's Yeoman and Manciple, with occasional omission
ef various passages. The Prologue begins:]
