
128 [Arnold.] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1880
find in all the verse of romance-poetry;—but this is saying
nothing. The virtue is such as we shall not find, perhaps, in
all English poetry, outside the poets whom I have named as
the special inheritors of Chaucer's tradition. A single line,
however, is too little if we have not the strain of Chaucer's
verse well in our memory; let us take a stanza. It is from
The Prioress’s Tale, the story of the Christian child murdered
in a Jewry—
'My throte is cut unto my nekké-bone
Saidè this child, and as by way of kinde
I should have deyd, yea, longè time agone [etc.].
Wordsworth has modernised this Tale, and to feel how delicate
and evanescent is the charm of verse, we have only to read
Wordsworth's first three lines of this stanza after Chaucer's—
'My throat is cut unto the bone, I trow,
Said this young child, and by the law of kind
I should have died, yea, many hours ago.'
The charm is departed. It is often said that the power of
liquidness and fluidity in Chaucer's verse was dependent
upon a free, a licentious dealing with language such as is now
impossible; upon a liberty, such as Burns too enjoyed, of
making words like neck bird, into a dissyllable by adding to
[p.
xxxiv]
them, and words like cause, rhyme, into a dissyllable by sound
sounding the e mute. It is true that Chaucer's fluidity is
conjoined with this liberty, and is admirably served by it;
but we ought not to say that it was dependent upon it. It
was dependent upon his talent. Other poets with a like
liberty do not attain to the fluidity of Chaucer; Burns him¬
self does not attain to it. Poets, again, who have a talent
akin to Chaucer's, such as Shakespeare or Keats, have known
how to attain to his fluidity without the like liberty.
And yet Chaucer is not one of the great classics. His
poetry transcends and effaces, easily and without effort, all
the romance-poetry of Catholic Christendom; it transcends
and effaces all the English poetry contemporary with it, it
transcends and effaces all the English poetry subsequent to it
down to the age of Elizabeth. Of such avail is poetic truth
of substance, in its natural and necessary union with poetic
truth of style. And yet, I say, Chaucer is not one of the
