
122 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1877-
you like. (3) An account of his poems one by one in as
chronological an order as is possible, what each is, whence
it came, peculiarities of it, necessary information about it,
and the like. (4) If you like, a chapter on Chaucer influence
on later poetry—And (5) another on Chaucer bibliography.
These are what occur to me. You may perhaps think
of other fitting topics. But anyhow—if you will do a
Division-Sum, and divide 140 pages by the various topics
to be thus treated—you will see how briefly and simply
each will have to be treated—and how simple and easy your
work would be. Do the Life first, in 30 pages or so—then the
series of works—and leave the head and tail of the book
till the last. But do write it.
[2] I am as hungry as ever for your 'Chaucer.' Do let
me have it.
[The book on Chaucer referred to was to form one of the series of primers brought
out by Green; the Chaucer one was eventually written, in 1893 (q.v. below), by
A. W. Pollard.]
1877. Meredith, George. On the Idea of Comedy, and of the Uses of
the Comic Spirit, [in] The New Quarterly Magazine, vol. viii, April,
1877, p. 35. (Works, 1897-8, 34 vols., vol. xxxii, p. 72.)
The Comic spirit is not hostile to the sweetest songfully
poetic. Chaucer bubbles with it: Shakespeare overflows.
1877. Unknown. Chaucer's Lore-Poetry, [in] the Cornhill Magazine,
March 1877, vol. XXXV, pp. 280-97.
[p. 281] Before going further, it may be as well to point out how
very small a portion of Chaucer's work decides the special
impression of him which now is historically transmitted from
generation to generation.
If it were possible to take away only a little more than a
tenth part of the poet’s voluminous writings, there would be
left a mass of outlandish recital having nothing whatever to
do with anything we now know of English tastes. Instead
of appearing a broad humourist, with an overpowering love of
nature, painting persons and scenes with exact reality, there
would then seem to be no English poet so artificial, so
romantic, so lackadaisical as Chaucer. The truth is, that the
literary associations for which the mention of his name is the
cue, belong to the Canterbury Tales only. ... If the match¬
less Introduction had not been written, or had been different,
