
126 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1880
often, while seeming so natural to women themselves, appear
so odd to male observers, Chaucer's eye was ever on the
alert.
[p. 187] His descriptions of nature are as true as his sketches of
human character; and incidental touches in him reveal his
love of the one as unmistakably as his unflagging interest
in the study of the other. Even those May-morning exordia,
in which he was but following a fashion—faithfully observed
both by the French trouvères and by the English romances
translated from their productions and not forgotten by the
author of the earlier part of the Roman de la Rose—always
came from his hands with the freshness of natural truth.
[Chap. IV, Epilogue, giving a sketch of the influence of
Chaucer.]
1880. Arnold, Matthew. The Study of Poetry, [the General Intro¬
duction to The English Poets, 1880, edited by T. H. Ward], pp.
xxxi-xxxvi, xliv, xlv. [Reprinted in Essays in Criticism, 2nd ser.,
1888, pp. 26-34, 49-51.]
[p. xxxi] But in the fourteenth century there comes an Englishman
nourished on this poetry [French romance-poetry], taught his
trade by this poetry, getting words, rhyme, metre from this
poetry; for even of that stanza which the Italians used, and
which Chaucer derived immediately from the Italians, the basis
and suggestion was probably given in France. Chaucer (I
have already named him) fascinated his contemporaries, but so
too did Christian of Troyes and Wolfram of Eschenbach.
Chaucer's power of fascination, however, is enduring; his
poetical importance does not need the assistance of the
historic estimate; it is real. He is a genuine source of joy
and strength, which is flowing still for us and will flow
always. He will be read, as time goes on, far more generally
than he is read now. His language is a cause of difficulty to
us, but so also, and I think in quite as great a degree, is the
language of Burns. In Chaucer's case, as in that of Burns, it
is a difficulty to be unhesitatingly accepted and overcome.
If we ask ourselves wherein consists the immense supe¬
riority of Chaucer's poetry over the romance poetry—why
it is that in passing from this to Chaucer we suddenly feel
ourselves to be in another world, we shall find that his
