1748. Unknown. Biographia Britannica, vol. ii, pp. 1026 [account of
W. Bullein, Dialogue, see above, 1564, p. 98], 1229, 1240-1, 1245-6
[Caxton], 1293-1308 [a long article on Chaucer]. For later
volumes see below, App. A., 1757 and 1760.
CHAUCER (Geoffrey) the Father of our English Poets, and
the first great improver and reformer of our language...
as he justly obtained the highest admiration amongst his
contemporaries, so his memory has ever since been highly
honoured. [Here follow the events of his life in great detail,
and a statement of the difficulties of getting at the facts about
it. Sprat, Pits, Leyland, Speght, Dart, Hearne, Ashmole,
Bale, and others are quoted.]...
[p. 1305] If we look upon him as an author, he may truly be
stiled the Father of English Poetry, and perhaps the Prince
of it, for except the unavoidable defects of language, his
Works have still all the beauties that can be wished for
or expected, in every kind of composition. He was not
unacquainted with the antient rules of Poetry, nor was he
incapable of writing up to them, as very clearly appears by
the Knight's Tale, which, as Mr. Dryden very justly says,
is a finished Epick Poem, but he did not always judge this
exactness necessary.   . . .
[p. 1307] We are not however to suppose, that with all these great
qualifications ['true genius, extensive learning, and a free
spirit'], Chaucer could entirely escape the fang of false
criticks... Those who have attacked Chaucer have not
presumed to question his wit, for of this perhaps no writer of
our nation ever had more, neither have they disputed his
poetical abilities, which certainly set his on a level with the
greatest names in antiquity; nor have they dared to throw
any aspersion on his learning, the extent of which is not
greater than the masterly degree of propriety with which it is
everywhere applied : but the point to which they object, is, his
changing, debasing, or corrupting our language, by introducing
foreign words, as if the worth of all languages did not arise
from their being thus enlarged and compounded...
. . . . . . . . . . .
[p. 1308] It is however just to observe, that this reflection never made
any great impression, and that with the best and most elegant
writers in our tongue, Chaucer passes not only for a great
improver, but for the very Father and Founder of it; and it
is not a little to his honour, that amongst those who are of
this opinion we may reckon one of the soundest of our Critics
[Rymer], and one of the correctest writers in our language
[Sprat].
[See above, 1692, p. 265, Rymer, and 1667, p. 244, Sprat.]