1737. [Morell, Thomas.] The Canterbury Tales of Chaucer, in the
Original, from the Most Authentic Manuscripts; And as they are
Turn'd into Modern Language by Mr. Dryden, Mr. Pope, and other
Eminent Hands. London, 1737, Dedication, pp. iii-vi. William
Thynne's dedication to Henry VIII, pp. vii-xiv. Account of the
Life of Chaucer [drawn from the Life in Urry’s edn. 1721], pp. xv¬
xx. Preface, pp. xxi-xxxvj. Appendix, pp. 349-452. [The book
only contains the general Prologue to the Tales, and the Knight’s
Tale. See below, 1771, p. 436, and 1741, p. 389, Ames.]
[Pre¬
face
This ancient Poet Jeoffery Chaucer, has now stood the Test
p.
p. xxii]
of above 300 Years, still read, and still admired, notwith¬
standing he hath been so wretchedly abused, miswrote and
mismetred by all his Editors, the last not excepted. I speak
not this to derogate from the Fame of the late Mr. Urry,
who died before he had completed his work.  ... [Quotations
from Thomas’s preface to Urry’s edn.: that Urry was of opinion
that Chaucer wrote in exact Metre, and therefore he proposed,
[p.
xxiv]
‘to restore him to his Feet again.’] But if Chaucer was a
Cripple before Mr. Urry restored him to his Feet,... he was
really born such; 'twas a natural Lameness, and no more a
Blemish in Chaucer's Time, than Round-Shoulders were in the
Days of Alexander the Great.  ...
[p.
xxv]
From this last Line [from the H. of Fame, l. 1098, ‘ ’ Tho
som Verse fail of a Syllable’], I conclude, that an exact
[p.
xxvi]
Numerosity (as Bp. Sprat expresses it in his Life of Cowley,
which, by the way, runs parallel with our Author's in many
Cases) was not Chaucer's main Care; but that he had some¬
times a greater Regard for the Sense, than the Metre: His
Numbers, however, are, by no Means so rough and inhar¬
monious as some People imagine; there is a charming Sim¬
plicity in them, and they are always musical, whether they
[p.
want or exceed their Complement.  ...
xxvii]
As to the final E, it was anciently pronounc’d, no doubt,
in feminine Adjectives, both from the Saxon and French, and
in those Substantives, that from the old Saxon are made
English, by changing a into e.  ... However, our Author
seems to have taken the Liberty to use it or not, as it best
served his Metre; But give me leave to observe, that he has
never used it in any even Place, except the 2d, where it is
allowable, especially if the Accent be strong upon the 4ᵗʰ.
Whanné that Apryl. v. 1.
Thatté no Drop. v. 131.
I say, that the final E, (and I believe I might say the same
of the plural es or is, especially of Monosyllables,...) is
never used in the 4ᵗʰ, 6ᵗʰ, 8ᵗʰ, or last Syllable of the Verse,
which is a Fault that most injudiciously runs thro' Mr. Urry’s
whole edition.
In a Gounè. v. 393.
And in a Glass haddè he, 699.
... [pp. xxviii-xxxiv, remarks on Chaucerian English and
grammar].
[p.
xxxv]
So lively are Chaucer's Descriptions, that only to read them,
is to carry Life back again, as it were, 300 Years, and to join
Conference with his merry Crew in their Pilgrimage to
Canterbury. From whence we may observe, that Nature is
still the same, however alter'd in her outward Dress, and
the Man that, like Chaucer and Shakespear, can trace her in
her most secret Recesses, will be sure, in every Age, to please.