1718. Sewell, George. The Proclamation of Cupid, or, a Defence of
Women, a poem from Chaucer, by Mr. Sewell. London.. 1718
[a folio pamphlet of 20 pp.]. Sign. *ab., a and ab.
To the LADIES.
To You, bright British Fair, whom she defends,
The Muse her undesigning Verse commends:
Smile, while She makes old Chaucer plead your Cause;
It is no Crime to give the Dead Applause,
For never Man, nor even Woman yet
Made lewd Constructions on a buried Wit.
If Graves and Tombstones don't offend your Ears,
He has been shrowded–full three hundred Years;
And now returns to shame this graceless Age,
Who Libel Woman from the Press, and Stage:...
 . . . . . . . . .
Our Bard, who if from Picture we may trace,
Had Strength, and Vigour, and an English Face,
Scorn'd the Design of Nature’s Gifts to spoil,
And damn his comely Person by his Stile.
He knew, whate’er might be his secret Thoughts
The Sex too well, to tell them half their Faults,
Not that he flatter'd them, and gave Pretence
To those he courted, to suspect his Sense.
 . . . . . . . . .
Chaucer, who shuns the Folly of Extremes,
With Wit and Truth records these common Themes;
Not wholly to the Fair devotes his Pen,
But wisely turns the Satyr on the Men:
Their Arts, their Stratagems at large displays,
And telling them, gives Woman silent Praise.
. . . . . . . . .
The Preface.
[sign. a] This Poem is generally admired by those who can taste it
in the obsolete Language of the Author, which inclin'd me to
believe it would not be unpleasing in a Modern Dress, the
Subject being adapted to all Times, Humours, and almost every
Stage of Life:...
Chaucer knew the State of the Case between the Sexes as
well as the best Poets of any Age, and in this Piece has
plainly shewn what a Master he was of Human Nature:...
[sign. a b] I must not dissemble that in some Editions of Chaucer this
Work is attributed to Thomas Occleve a Scholar of his, and is
said to have bore [sic] this Title, A Treatise of the Conversation
of Men and Women in the little Island of Albion. But this in
all Probability is a mere Fiction; the Title indeed might be
added by Occleve, but Leland positively ascribes Epistolam
Cupidinis to Chaucer, and reckons it among his genuine Pieces.
What makes this more probable is, that Chaucer refers to his
Legend of Good Women in this Poem, and to the Romaunt of
the Rose, which he translated from the French of John de
Mohun. I know the common Story of Occleve's Recantation,
but I believe this Authority enough to overballance that;
beside that Chaucer in his Praise of Woman has much the
Same Thoughts, and goes upon the same Topicks as in this
Letter of Cupid’s.
I cannot call this Attempt of Mine an Imitation, for though
I have commonly had the Poet’s Scheme in my Eye, yet I
have very often taken the Liberty of grafting upon his Stock,
where I fancied it would bear it without forcing Nature too
much. As to the Design, No one ought to be offended since
the Satyr is pretty equally dealt on each Hand; there is
Severity, but the Severity of a Court-Poet; much Wit and
more good Manners. This I speak of the Original...