1721. Thomas, Timothy. Preface and Glossary to The Works of
Chaucer... printed by John Urry... London, 1721. [MS, note
in margin: “by T. T. with corrections and additions by W. T."]
also copious MS. notes to edn. of Urry’s Chaucer [B. M. pr. m. 643.
m. 4.]
[sign. i 2] The Reader will meet with no more interruption here, than
will be necessary to acquaint him in some measure with Mr.
Urry's Design in this Edition.... As for my self, I was
equally a stranger to Mr. Urry and his Undertaking, till some
time after his Death; when a Person [in a MS. note in
margin ‘Dr. Smalridge, then Dean of Christ Church’] whose
Commands I was in all Duty bound to obey, put the Works of
Chaucer into my hands, with his Instructions to assist in
carrying on this Edition, and to prepare Matter for a Glossary
to it. Mr. Thomas Ainsworth of Christ-Church had been em¬
ployed by Mr. Urry in transcribing part of the Work for the
Press, and was therefore thought qualified to proceed in
preparing the rest for my perusal. This Gentleman likewise
dyed in August 1719, soon after the whole Text of Chaucer
was printed off.  . . .
About the latter end of the year 1711, some Persons well
acquainted with Mr. Urry's Qualifications [MS. note :— ‘Dr.
Atterbury, Dean of Ch. Ch.'] (who, he thought, had a right to
command him) proposed to him to put out a new Edition of
Chaucer; which he was perswaded to undertake, though much
against his inclination: “For, though (as he says) his skill in
the Northern Language spoken in the Lowlands of Scotland
qualified him to read this Poet with more ease and pleasure
than one altogether bred be-South Trent could do without
more than common Application, yet he assures us, he had not
the least thought of publishing his private Diversions.
Having thus undertaken the Work, he proposed to proceed
in this Method, viz. to correct the Text of Chaucer, and add
what he could find of his Works in MSS. which had not been
printed; to make some Observations upon the Author, and
among other things to shew where he had imitated or borrowed
from the Greek or Latin Poets; to add a more copious
Glossary than had been printed before; to write a fuller
Account of his Life than had been yet published; and to
acquaint the Reader in a Preface what he should have
performed in this Edition.  ....
[sign. i 2b] His chief business was to make the Text more correct and
compleat than before. He found it was the opinion of some
learned Men that Chaucer's Verses originally consisted of an
equal number of Feet; and he himself was perswaded that
Chaucer made them exact Metre, and therefore he proposed in
this Edition to restore him (to use his own Expression) to his
feet again, which he thought might be performed by a careful
Collation of the best printed Editions and good MSS.
He had observed that several Initial and Final Syllables in
use in Chaucer's time, and since, had been omitted or added at
pleasure in the MSS. by unskilful Transcribers, from whence
the same Errors crept into the Printed Editions, whereby
many Verses were rendered unjust in their Measure; so that
the lameness of many of them might easily be remedied by the
discreet Addition or Omission of such Syllables.
The Initial Syllables were chiefly a, i, and y.  ... The
Final Syllables... the chiefest of which... was the
Final è, which he always marked with an accent when he
judged it necessary to pronounce it;.... Whether the
assistance of this Final è be not here too frequently, and
sometimes unnecessarily, called in, is not my business at
present to enquire into.  ... [Other methods used by Urry
of lengthening the words were the pronounciation of the
terminations ed and id in the past tenses of verbs, &c., of en and
in as terminations of verbs, nouns and adverbs, and of the
[sign. k1] plural endings es and is] And in short I find it acknowledged
by him, “That whenever he could by no other way help a
Verse to a Foot, which he was perswaded it had when it came
from the Maker's hands, but lost by the Ignorance of
Transcribers, or Negligence of Printers, he made no scruple to
supply it with some Word or Syllable that serv’d for an
Expletive": But I find at the same time that he had once a
design of enclosing such words in hooks thus[ ] to distinguish
them from what he found justified by the authority of MSS.,
but how it came to pass that so just, useful and necessary
a Design was not executed, I cannot satisfy the curious
Reader.  ...
[Then follows a complete list and description of the various
MSS. and the printed editions of Chaucer consulted.]
[For some account of T. Thomas, and appreciation of his work, see Tyrwhitt's
Preface to the Canterbury Tales, vol. i, 1775, p. xx and note, also Advertisement to
Glossary, vol. v, 1778, p. ii, partially reprinted here in the note to Urry's edition,
p. 354 above.]