1712. Urry, John. Letter to Lord Harley, [printed in] Report on the
Manuscripts of his Grace the Duke of Portland, preserved ath
Welbeck Abbey, vol. v (Historical MSS. Commission), 1899,
pp. 247-8.
[p. 247] 1712, November 24–Mr. Dean of Christ Church tells me
from Mr. Broxholm, your honour has found out another Tale
[p. 248] of Chaucer’s, that never was in print. I need not tell you I
shall be glad to see it, and hope you will favour me with a
sight of it when I come to Christ Church, which will be very
soon.   . . . Last week the Honourable Mrs. Thynn of Cawston
sent me a MS. Chaucer, which she has lately purchased; it
belonged to Mr. Long, Prebendary of Exeter Church. ’Tis all
unbound and wants several leaves, and some whole Tales, but
yet there are two in it that I have not met with anywhere
else. The one is what passed at the inn at Canterbury,
and how the Pilgrims disposed of themselves, and the Par¬
doner's misadventure with the Tapster of that inn [Prologue
to Beryn]. The other is the Merchant's tale as they return
from Canterbury; 'tis long; I have not read it, but after it
are these two lines in the same hand with the rest of the
MS—
Nomen autoris presentis cronica Romæ
Et translatoris filius Ecclesiæ Thomæ.
If what you have discovered is one of these, I shall be the
better enabled to put it forth from two MSS., but if it is
different from these, I shall thereby enlarge my collection of
Chaucer’s works, and that will be some commendation to the
edition I am preparing. I transcribe every line, so that I,
that am not a swift penman, find I have set myself a tedious
task. I am advanced a great way in the Tales, and have
taken as great care of the versification as I can, being per¬
suaded Chaucer made them exact metre, but the transcribers
have much injured them. In his Troilus and Creseide he says
to his book–
And for there is so great diversitie
In English and in writing of our tonge,
So pray I God, that none miswrite the
Ne the mismetre for default of tonge.
So that if I, by the help of MSS. and several printed editions
can restore him to his feet again, I shall have done, though
no great matter, as much as I am able to do, and that in a
good measure I think I shall do.
I shall make no complaints of the difficulties I meet with in
this trifling business. I shall reserve them to a paragraph in
the preface, and there I'll magnify my labours and talk as big,
though but a paltry editor, as if I were the very author him¬
self. But Chaucer was a modest man, and boasting will not
become me. However, you will give me leave, I hope, to
mention how much I am beholden to you in procuring me
that valuable MS. from my Lord Treasurer's library, and
promising to get me the habits of the pilgrims, and finding
out a new Tale to grace the edition, and many other favours,
for all which I most humbly thank your Lordship, and with
all respect kiss your hands.
[Mrs. Thynne's MS. afterwards passed to the Northumberland Collection at
Alnwick. See below, Horwood and Martin, 1872.]