1736. Entick, John. Proposals for Printing by Subscription in Two
Volumes Folio the Works of that Most Learned Facetious and Ancient
English Poet, Sir Geoffrey Chaucer Knt. Poet Laureat.  ... Critical,
Poetical, Historical and Explanatory Notes, to render the Work
both easy and pleasant to the Reader, and, by shewing his un¬
parellel’d Beauties, convince every judicious Englishman that this
our Author is no ways inferior to the greatest Poets that have wrote
in any Nation or Language, either before or after him.  ...
The Introduction.
[p. 2,
col. 1]
Poetry in England never flourisht more than in the days of
Sir GEOFFERY CHAUCER, the Riches of his Understanding flow'd
like Nectar on every Word; whose elegant stile adorn'd his
happy Invention, and his Profession obtain'd for him Riches
and Honours.  ... THEREFORE my present Undertaking is to
rescue that famous English Poet, Sir GEOFFERY CHAUCER out
of that Oblivion into which his piratical Imitators have en¬
deavour'd to bring him.  ... [The praises of Chaucer, by
Denham, Lydgate, Spenser, Wm. Thynne, Francis Beaumont,
Peacham, Dryden and Sir Henry Savil, are then quoted.]
[p. 4,
col. 2]
Therefore, as it is agreed upon by all hands that CHAUCER
was accounted the Chief of the English POETS, not only in his
Time, but continues to be so esteem’d in this Age: what shou’d
discourage my Undertaking to publish his WORKS in such a
modern Dress, that it may be justly said I now restore to this
Age the most valuable Treasure of the English-Poetic Library;
so that, from the success we hope this WORK will meet with
from our COUNTRYMEN, as formerly HORACE took the Liberty to
speak of Himself and Works, Methinks I hear CHAUCER say :
‘ ’Tis finish'd; I have rais'd a Monument,
More strong than Brass, and of a vast Extent,
. . . . . .  . . .
Which eating Show’rs, nor North wind’s piercing Blast,
Nor whirling Time, nor Flight of Years can waste:
Whole Chaucer shall not die, his Songs shall save
His greatest Portion from the silent Grave.
. . . . . . . . .
[A specimen of the Prologue then follows, with copious
notes.]