1715. Elstob, Elizabeth. The Rudiments of Grammar for the English¬
Saxon Tongue, first given in English: with an Apology for the
study of Northern Antiquities. Being very useful toward the
understanding our ancient English Poets, and other Writers. By
Elizabeth Elstob... London... 1715. Preface, pp. xvi-xviii,
note, xix, xxiv, xxviii-ix.
[Paraphrase of pp. xi-xiii. An Examination of (1) whether
the charge made against the Northern languages is true, that
they consist of nothing but Monosyllables; and (2) whether
the copiousness and variety of Monosyllables may be always
justly reputed a fault. The answer to (1) is that the ancient
Northern languages (Gothick, Saxon and Teutonick) do not
wholly nor mostly consist of Monosyllables. The answer to
(2) is that if copiousness and variety of Monosyllables be a
fault, it is one that might as justly be charged upon Latin and
Greek–here follow examples from Greek and Latin poets.
Not only so, but in modern poets we find great use of mono¬
syllables, even in Dryden, who would have us believe he had
a great aversion to them; note Denham’s lines on Cooper's
Hill, which Dryden so admires.]
[p. xvi] To give greater Probability to what I have said concerning
Monosyllables, I will give some Instances, as well from such
Poets as have gone before him [Dryden], as those which have
succeeded him. It will not be taken amiss by those who
value the Judgment of Sir Philip Sydney, and that of
Mr. Dryden, if I begin with Father Chaucer.
Er it was Day, as was her won to do.
Again,
And but I have her Mercy and her Grace,
That I may seen her at the leste way;
I nam but deed there nis no more to say.
Again,
[p. xvii]
Alas, what is this wonder Maladye:
For heate of colde, for colde of heate I dye.
Chaucer's first Book of Troylus, fol. 159, b. [11. 419-20]
. . . . . . . .
But before, at least contemporary with Chaucer, we find
Sir John Gower, not baulking Monosyllables; . .
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. xviii,
Besides the Purpose for which these Verses are here cited,
note]
it may not be amiss to observe from some Instances of Words
contain'd in them, how necessary, at least useful, the Know¬
ledge of the Saxon Tongue is, to the right understanding
our Old English Poets, and other Writers. For example,
leuest, this is the same with the Saxon leofort, most
beloved, or desirable. Goddes folke, not God his Folk, this
has plainly the Remains of the Saxon Genitive Case, [&c.].
[p. xix] "Let Lydgate, Chaucer’s Scholar also be brought in for a
. . . . . . .
Voucher;
For Chaucer that my Master was and knew
What did belong to writing Verse and Prose,
Ne’er stumbled at small faults, nor yet did view
With scornful Eye the Works and Books of those
That in his time did write, nor yet would taunt
At any Man, to fear him or to daunt.
Tho' the Verse is somewhat antiquated, yet the Example
ought not to be despised by our modern Criticks, especially
those who have any Respect for Chaucer.
[p. xxvi] To these let me add the Testimony of that Darling of the
. . . . . . . . .
Muses, Mr. Prior, with whom all the Poets of ancient and
modern Times of other Nations, or our own, might seem to
have intrusted the chief Secrets, and greatest Treasures of
their Art. I shall speak only concerning our own Island,
where his Imitation of Chaucer, of Spencer, and of the old
Scotch Poem, inscribed the Nut-Brown Maid, shew how great
a Master he is. ...
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. xxviii] Sir, from these numerous Instances, out of the writings of
our greatest and noblest Poets, it is apparent, That had the
Enmity against Monosyllables with which there are some who
make so great a Clamour, been so great in all Times, we must
have been deprived of some of the best Lines, and finest
Flowers, that are to be met with in the beautiful Garden of
our English Posie [sic]....
I speak not this, upon Confidence of any Judgment I have
in Poetry, but according to that Skill, which is natural to the
[p. xxix] Musick of a Northern Ear, which, if it be deficient, as I shall
not be very obstinate in its Defence, I beg leave it may at
least be permitted the Benefit of Mr. Dryden's Apology, for
the Musick of old Father Chaucer's Numbers, “That there is
the rude Sweetness of a Scotch Tune in it, which is natural
and pleasing, tho' not perfect.
[All the verse quotations are in black letter.]