1713. Hearne, Thomas. Extracts from his Diary, April 5, Nov. 28,
1713 [in] Remarks and Collections of Thomas Hearne, Oxford Hist.
Soc., vol. iv, 1898, ed. D. W. Rannie, pp. 150-1, 261.
April 5 (Sun.). Mr. Urry tells me yᵗ yᵉ Name Cornhil
appears at yᵉ End of the Retractation of Chaucer's Parson's
Tale in a MS. he hath. Who [was] this Cornhill?
In a MS. Chaucer lent by the present Lᵈ, Treasurer to
Mʳ. Urry. ’Tis in Vellam, very near the time in wᶜʰ the Author
[p. 151] family, 1548 to 1585.] At the End of the said Book:
lived: [Here follow a list of births, &c. mostly of the Fox
Edwarde Foxe oweythe this booke ex dono patris sui. In
red Letters this followeth: Here endeth the book of the tales
of Cauntirburye, Compyled by Geffraye Chaucers. Of whos
soule Ihesu Crist have mercye. Amen quod Cornhyll.
At the beginning in a spare Leaf: Thys boke belongith to
me Edmond Foxe felow of Lyncolls Inne.
Equus de stanno for a Horse of Brass in one of the MS.
Chaucers yᵗ Mr. Urry hath, being a note of yᵉ Scribe.
The same ignorant Scribe in the Title of the Dʳ. of
Physick’s Tale, Fabula de le Fisician de Virginius Apius &
Claudius.
In the Tale of the Shipman he writes, fabula cujusd.
Shipman.
In the title of the Manciple’s Tale yᵉ same scribe: Mancipij
fab: de la Crowe.
In yᵉ Margin of a Paper MS. (very much Shattered) of
Chaucer, yᵗ Mr. Urry borrowed of Col. Hen. Worsley at yᵉ
Beginning of the Sergeant of Law's Tale, where he mentions
Europe, this Note: Europa est tercia pars mundi. It is agᵗ
these words of all Europe Queen. Hence, I think, it is plain
yᵗ this Book was written before yᵉ Discovery of America.
[p. 261] Nov. 28 (Sat.).... Mr. Bagford tells me yᵗ Caxton printed
Chaucer's Fragmᵗˢ, in 4ᵗᵒ, wᵗʰout Date wᶜʰ are not taken into
his Ed. of the Tales. This is now in the Hands of yᵉ Bᵖ. of
Ely, who had it of Mʳ. Bagford. Dʳ. Tanner hath seen this
Book. And ’tis certainly a Treasure.—K. Henry VIIIᵗʰ. hath
an Act for reading of the Scriptures, in wᶜʰ also Chaucer's
Canterbury Tales and Gower de Amore are allow'd to be read
by the common People, and likewise the Legenda Aurea.
[See above 1477-8, p. 58, for Caxton, and 1542-3, p. 84, an Acte for thadvauncement
of true Religion.]