1713. Gay, John. The Wife of Bath, a comedy,... by Mr. Gay.
1713.
Prologue.
If ancient Poets thought the Prologue fit,
To sport away superfluous Starts of Wit;
Why should we Moderns lavish ours away,
And to supply the Proloque starve the Play ?
Thus Plays of late, like Marriages in Fashion,
Have nothing good besides the Preparation.
How shall we do to help our Author out,
Who both for Play and Prologue is in doubt?
He draws his Characters from Chaucer's Days,
On which our Grandsires are profuse of Praise.
. . . . . . . . .
Dramatis Personæ.
Men.
Chaucer.
Doggrell.
Franklyn, a Rich Yeoman of Kent.
Doublechin, a Monk.
Merit in Love with Florinda.
Astrolabe, an Astrologer.
Antony,
William,
Servants to Franklyn.
A Drawer.
Women.
Myrtilla, a Lady of Quality.
Florinda, Franklyn’s Daughter.
Alison, the Wife of Bath.
Busie, Myrtilla's Woman.
Scene, an Inn lying in the
Road between London and
Canterbury.
[Act i, sc. 1, Frank. You must know, Sir, that we came thus far with
sign. B 2]
the Canterbury Pilgrims,–certainly the most diverting
Company that ever travell’d the Road-and my House
lying in the way, I design to invite them all to the
Wedding to Morrow.
Dog. And there is a Nun of Quality, I am told, hath just
now joyned them.
Frank. The Wife of Bath is enough to make any Mortal
split his Sides. She is as frolicksome as a young Wench
in the Month of May, plays at Romps with the Pilgrims
all round, throws out as many quaint Jokes as an Oxford
Scholar;–and, in short, exerts herself so facetiously, that
she is the Mirth of the whole Company.
Dog. But the Support of the Society is Mr. Chaucer-he
is a Gentleman of such inexhaustible good Sense, Breed¬
ing, and Civility, that since I have had the Happiness to
converse with him, he hath honour'd some of my
Productions with his Approbation.
[This original 'Chaucer' form of the 'Wife of Bath' was not a success, so in 1730,
Gay altered and revised it, striking out the characters of 'Chaucer' and 'Franklyn,'
and substituting the modern characters of 'Sir Harry Gauntlet' and 'Plowdon' in
their place. In this 2nd edn. the old Prologue is kept, and there is no word of the
reason for the change. See Johnson, in his Life of Gay (Lives of the Poets, 1731),
where he says: 'In 1713 he [Gay] brought a comedy called "The Wife of Bath" upon
the stage, but it received no applause; he printed it, however; and seventeen years
after, having altered it, and, as he thought, adapted it more to the public taste, he
offered it again to the town; but though he was flushed with the success of the
"Beggar's Opera," had the mortification to see it again rejected.' Both versions are
reprinted in vol. iii of Gay's Miscellaneous Works, 1772-3.
See letter from Gay to Swift, 9 Nov. 1729; also one of 3 March, 1729-30, in which he
says, 'My old vamped play [The Wife of Bath] got me no money, for it had no
success.' Pope, Works, 1871, pp. 165, 183.]