1721. The Works of Geoffrey Chaucer, compared with the Former
Editions and many valuable MSS. Out of which, Three
Tales are added which were never before Printed; By John
Urry, Student of Christ-Church, Oxon, Deceased: Together
with a Glossary, By a Student of the same College. To
the Whole is prefixed The Author’s Life, newly written,
and a Preface, giving an Account of this Edition. London,
Printed for Bernard Lintot, between the Temple Gates.
1721.
[This edition is, from the point ot view of the text, the worst ever issued. Urry
altered, respelt and even added words to Chaucer's text with the greatest freedom,
without giving any indication that he had done so–see Preface by Timothy Thomas.
Urry apparently did all the work of preparing the text for the press, and then died,
on March 18, 1714-15, before the prefaces, glossary &c. were written. The rights of
printing the edition were handed over by Urry to his executor Mr. Brome and the
Dean and Chapter of Christ-Church and Bernard Lintot, bookseller, and proposals
to print the book by subscription were issued in 1716 [q. v., p. 344]. It was not,
however, published till 1721, being then completed with Preface, Glossary, etc., by
Timothy Thomas, which were revised for press by William Thomas. (See below for
W. Thomas' annotated copy.) Urry included in this edition two spurious Tales,
which had never before been printed: viz. : The Coke’s Tale of Gamelyn, pp. 36-48,
and the Mery Adventure of the Pardonere and Tapstere and Tale of Beryn, one
piece, pp. 594-626. For an account of Urry, see extract here given from the diary
of Thomas Hearne, Mar. 17, 1714-15, pp. 331-2 above, and also the whole entry in
Remarks and Collections of Thomas Hearne, Oxford Hist. Soc., vol. v, ed. D.W.
Rannie, 1901, pp. 33-6. See also the account of Urry’s will given by Hearne, May 13,
1715, ibid., p. 58, also pp. 72 and 105.
For further information about Urry and the production of this edition, see
Literary Anecdotes of the 18th century, by John Nichols, 1812, vol. i, pp. 196-9,
where he says, amongst much else, "About the latter end of the year 1711, it was
proposed to Mr. Urry, who was a native of Scotland, by some persons well acquainted
with his qualifications (who he thought, had a right to command him) to put out
a new edition of Chaucer; which he was persuaded to undertake, though much
against his inclinations. This recommendation was, probably, from Dean Aldrich,
who well knew the talents of his pupil." Then follows a full account of the produc¬
tion of the book, Urry's application for a patent, his death, and epitaph, his character,
the Agreement for the printing of Chaucer (see under 1715), the Proposals (see under
1716), and the Glossary; also a reference to the copy of Urry's Chaucer annotated
by T. Thomas, then in the possession of Mr. A. Chalmers (now in the British
Museum, see below), in which Thomas says that Bishop Atterbury was the chief
person who proposed to Urry to undertake an edition of Chaucer. Mr. Thomas
adds, that the Bishop (then Dean of Christ-Church) "did by no means judge rightly
of Mr. Urry’s talents in this case; who, though in many respects a most worthy
person, was not qualifled for a work of this nature." See also Tyrwhitt, in his
Appendix to the Preface to the Canterbury Tales, vol. i, 1776, pp. xix, xx and note.
"I shall say but little of that [Urry's] edition, as a very fair and full account of
it is to be seen in the modest and sensible Preface prefxed to it by Mr. Timothy
Thomas, upon whom the charge of publishing Chaucer devolved, or rather was
imposed, after Mr. Urry's death. The strange licence, in which Mr. Urry appears
to have indulged himself, of lengthening and shortening Chaucer's words according
to his own fancy, and of even adding words of his own, without giving his readers
the least notice, has made the text of Chaucer in his Edition by far the worst that
was ever published."
Tyrwhitt adds, in a footnote to p. xx, that he learns Timothy Thomas wrote the
preface "from a MS. note in an interleaved copy of Urry's Chaucer, presented to
the British Museum by Mr. William Thomas, a brother, as I apprehend, of Mr. T.
Thomas. T. Thomas was of Christ-Church, Oxford, and died in 1757, aged LIX.
... Mr. W. Thomas has taken a great deal of unnecessary pains in collating that
copy of Urry's Edit. with several MSS. The best part of the various readings
serves only to correct the arbitrary innovations, which Mr. Urry had introduced into
the text. He has employed himself to better purpose upon the Glossary, where he
has made many emendations and additions, which may be of considerable use, if ever
a new Glossary to Chaucer shall be compiled." In Tyrwhitt's Advertisement to his
Chaucer Glossary, published 1778, vol. v. of the Canterbury Tales, p. ii, he acknow¬
ledges his debt to T. Thomas, saying he has "built upon his foundations, and often
with his materials."]
CONTENTS: [To face title page, engraved portrait of Urry.]
[Title page, as above, with engraved picture of Chaucer's
tomb.]
[An engraved oval portrait of Chaucer, written above
"Geoffrey Chaucer, our Antient & Learned English Poet,
died 1400, Æta. 72.", and underneath:
”Anglia Chaucerum veneratur nostra Poetam,
Cui veneres debet patria lingua suas.”
Tho. Occleve Contemporar. & discipulus ejusdem Chauceriad
viv. delin. Geo. Vertue sculp. 1717.]
[sign. a-f2] The Life of Geoffrey Chaucer. [By Dart, corrected by
W. Thomas, see below, pp. 358-61.]
[sign. f 2b  Testimonies of Learned Men concerning Chaucer and his
-i 1ᵇ.]
Works. [By W. Thomas.]
[Testimonies from Gower, Lidgate, Occleve, Anonymous
verses taken by Speght from a book of Stow’s, Gawin Douglas,
Leland, Wm. Thynne, the publisher of Lidgate's Trojan war
1555, Roger Ascham, Sir Philip Sidney, Puttenham, Fox,
Surigonius, Camden, Spenser, Verstegan, Francis Beaumont,
Sir Henry Savil, Selden, Sir John Denham, Milton, Sprat,
Skinner, Sir Richard Baker, Peacham, Will. Winstanley,
Edw. Philips, Sir Thos. Pope Blount, Rymer, Dryden—and in
MS. added by W. Thomas, the Description of Chaucer out of
Greene’s Vision c. 1592, Skelton's Phillyp Sparrow, Lilius
Gyraldus Dialogi de Poetis & Flor. 1551, p. 72, Caxton at end
of his edn. of Chaucer’s Boethius, Addison, Alex. Gil, Strype,
and Hearne’s Letter to Bagford.]
[sign. i 2ᵃ-m 2ᵃ]  The Preface. [By T. Thomas, revised by W. Thomas.]
[sign. m 2ᵇ -n 1ᵃ] The Contents [of the Text].
[sign. n 1ᵇ-n 2ᵃ] Eight godely Questions with their Answeres.
[sign 2nᵇ] [The Licence, dated 20 July 1714, q.v. below, App. A, 1714.]
[sign. B (p. 1)
[The text.]
-p. 626]
A Glossary explaining the obsolete and difficult words in
Chaucer [by T. Thomas].
[sign. 8 Q³ to end]
A Short Account of some of the Authors cited by Chaucer.
[Description of an interleaved and annotated copy of the
above edition bound in two volumes [ordinary copies are
in one volume], notes by T. and W. Thomas, in the British
Museum, 643. m. 4.]
[vol. i]
[Inserted at the beginning an Agreement for the printing of
Chaucer, in MS., dated 1715. See above, pp. 333-4.]
Proposals [for printing Chaucer by subscription, two pages
printed folio, dated June 30, 1716. See above, pp. 344-5].
[Title page as above, with engraved picture of Chaucer's
tomb.]
[Inserted between portrait of Urry and title page, two copies
of Urry's epitaph (1714, see above, p. 332), one in Urry's
writing, the other a copy.]
Testimonies of Learned Men concerning Chaucer and his
Works, sign. f 2 b.-i 1 b. [MS. note “collected by W. T.
1720."]
The Preface, [MS. note “by T. T. with corrections and
additions by W. T."] sign. i 2-m 2.
description of three MS. copies of the Canterbury Tales
[MS. leaf inserted between sign. 1 ₁ b and 1₂, containing a
belonging to the Earl of Oxford.]
letter from Mr. Wotton, May 5, 1722. See below, p. 363.]
[On blank page before the Glossary extract in MS. from a
[vol. ii] A Glossary explaining the obsolete and difficult words in
Chaucer [MS. note “By Timothy Thomas"], sign. 7 U 2-
8 Q 1.
[Copious MS. notes all through by Timothy Thomas and
by W. Thomas.]