1720. [Sewell, George.] A Defence of Women of [sic] the Proclamation
of Cupid, a poem from Chaucer. The Preface to the Proclamation of
Cupid. Preface to The Song of Troilus, and The Song of Troilus
[in] A New Collection of original Poems, never before printed
in any Miscellany, by the Author of Sir Walter Raleigh. London,
1720, pp. 16-22, 43 n., 44 n., 82-5.
[The first poem here referred to, and the prefatory verses
and Preface, are an exact reprint from The Proclamation of
Cupid, 1718. See above, p. 347.]
[p. 82] Preface [to the Song of Troilus].
I have often wonder'd that Chaucer, the Father of our
English Poetry, generally acknowledged as such, and frequently
applauded for his Excellence, should be so little read, as
appears from most of our Modern Compositions. His Fame
is taken upon Credit, from the Recommendations of others;
and they who speak of him, rather pay a blind Veneration
to his Antiquity than his intrinsic Worth, which perhaps
may bear a Competition with the Refiners of Poetry in
any other Language. They who seem most to have studied
him, are our incomparable Spenser, Milton, and Dryden;
others have but mimick'd his Garb, without hitting his Air
and Mien. An old Word, or Phrase or two, accidentally
thrown among twenty modern and fashionable ones, have given
an unjust Repute to some Imitations of Chaucer. In the mean
time, the Boldness of his Imagery, the natural Beauty of his
Similitudes, and the Delicacy of his Thoughts, are generally
neglected, though his best Ornaments: They have rubb'd of
his Rust for their own Use, and left the Steel in the Posses¬
sion of the right Owner. Mr. Dryden indeed stands an
exception to this Accusation, he never missing, but improving
[p. 83] every noble Hint of this Author; regardless of the Expres¬
sion, his view is at the Sense, the Spirit, the Figures of
his Predecessor. Before ever he undertook to dress him in
Modern English, it is plain to me, that he was an early
Admirer of him, and transferr'd many of his Beauties into
his own Poems; as commendable a Design, as Virgil’s in
borrowing from Ennius, and Lucretius. I could give many
instances of this; but let one general, and one particular
be sufficient. The manner of reasoning in Verse, which
Mr. Dryden so artfully introduced into his Heroic Plays,
is entirely Chaucer’s, as may be seen even by this little Piece
following. That he used his Images and Thoughts, be this
a Testimony. In the Description of Absalom's Beauty, he
summs up all with this Line;
And Paradise was open'd in his Face.
Chaucer in his Cresseide, says,
That Paradise stood formed in her Eyen.
The Thought in this Song has been used, and diversified a
hundred times since Chaucer's Days; and yet he seems to
have said more, and that more pathetically than any of his
Imitators. It is taken from the First Book of Troilus and
Cresseide; and the Reader by a Comparison may see how
little Variation there is from the Original, and give his
Judgment at Pleasure. I only wish that so excellent a Poet
as Chaucer may be no longer admir'd at a Distance, but
brought into the Acquaintance of the Polite World; and it
it is to be hoped the New Edition of his Works [Urry's
Chaucer, 1721] will compleat that Wish.