1724. Welsted, [Leonard]. A Dissertation concerning the Perfection
of the English Language, the State of Poetry, &c. [prefixed to]
Epistles, Odes, &c.  ... By Mr. Welsted,... 1724 pp. x, xii, xiii.
The vulgar Opinion therefore is a vulgar Error, viz. that
our Language will continue to go on from one Refinement to
another, and pass through perpetual Variations and Improve¬
ments, till in Time the English, we now speak, is become as
obsolete and unintelligible as that of Chaucer, and so on, as
long as we are a People; this is what one of our Poets laid
down some years ago as an undoubted maxim,
And what now Chaucer is, shall Dryden be.
But whoever this Writer is [Pope, in his Essay on Criticism,
l. 483; see above, p. 311, and for other references to it see
above, p. 315, and below, pp. 369, 379, 383], he certainly
judg'd the Matter wrong; it is with Languages, as it is with
Animals, Vegetables, and all other Things; they have their
Rise, their Progress, their Maturity, and their Decay.  ...
[p. xii] The Notion I have... is, that the English Language
[p. xiii] does, at this Day, possess all the Advantages and Excel¬
lencies, which are very many, that its Nature will admit
of.  ...
[The same idea, without any mention of Chaucer's name, is expressed in Welsted's
Epistle to the Duke of Chandos, ibid. pp. 43-5.
The Growth of Learning, like the Growth of Trees,
Thrives unobserved, and springs by alow Degrees;
Like the famed English Oak, her Head she rears,
[p. 44]
And gains Perfection thro' a Length of Years;
The first Essays in Verse are rudely writ,
The Numbers rough, and unchastized the Wit:
Thus, BRIDGES, in thy great Forefathers' Times,
Harsh was our Language, and untuned our Rhimes;
Great SPENCER first, in blest ELIZA’s Days,
Smoothed our old Metre, and refined our Lays;
Next manly MILTON, Prince of Poets, came,
And to our Numbers added Homer's Flame;
Since when, in Verse few Wonders have been wrought,
And our smooth Cadence flows devoid of Thought.
. . . . . . . . .
Th' approaching Times my raptured Thought engage;
[p. 45]
I see arise a New Augustean [sic] Age.]
