[1709.] Hearne, Thomas. A Letter to Mr. Bagford, containing some
Remarks upon Geffry Chaucer and his Writings [in] Robert of
Gloucester’s Chronicle, ed. Thomas Hearne, 1724, vol. ii, Appendix
iv, pp. 596-606.
Sir,
§1. A laudable
I cannot but highly commend your In¬
Undertaking, to
dustry, in being so inquisitive into the Life
endeavour to give
an Account of the
and Writings of Geffry Chaucer, the Prince
Life and Writings
of our English Poëts; and I am extremely
of Geffry Chaucer.
oblig’d to you, for the Account you sent me
of the Editions of him, that you have hitherto met with.
Would others but imitate your Diligence, we should under¬
stand this excellent Poët much better than we do, and be
able to give a far more correct Edition of him than has hither¬
to appear’d. Such an Undertaking will derive great Honour
upon those, that shall ingage in it, and will be gratefully
receiv’d by all true Scholars and Antiquaries. For Chaucer
was not only an excellent Poët, but was admirably well
vers’d in most Parts of Learning. And besides his profound
Learning, he was a compleat Gentleman, & skill’d in all the
Arts of Address. These Qualifications made him belov’d and
honour’d, and his Conversation & Acquaintance were courted
by the Greatest Personages, insomuch that he was sent
Ambassadour into Forreign Parts, where he came of [sic] with
as much Applause, as he did in any of his Performances in his
own Native Country. This does not seem to be at all owing
to his Birth, his Father, not withstanding wealthy, being, in
all probability, only  a Merchant; tho’ I know, that Leland,
in which he is follow’d by Bale, tells us, that he was nobili
loco natus, which seems to be a mistake, there being no
Evidence now remaining, that we know of, to confirm such an
[p. 597] Assertion, unless it be that from the Roll of Battle-Abbey we
learn, that the Chaucers came with the Conqueror into
England, and that Pitts tells us, that his Father was a Knight.
Nor are we uncertain only as to his Ancestors, and his Quality,
but there are a great many other Particulars relating to him,
which, at present, we know nothing of, which I am perswaded
we might be satisfied in by a diligent Inspection into antient
Records. I have not time myself to assist in any such
Attempt: and therefore I leave it to your self and others, who
have both leisure and opportunity of going through so desirable
a Work.
§2. In which
We have several eminent Persons for
we have William
Precedents in this usefull Inquiry, which
Caxton, and
several other
cannot but add Life and Vigour to those
eminent Persons
who concern themselves in it. For soon
for Precedents.
after Printing was established in this Island,
William Caxton, besides divers other good Books, set him¬
self carefully about searching out and publishing the several
Pieces of Geffry Chaucer; but I much question whether he
printed divers of them together. For tho’ Stow and some
others inform us that he was the first that publish’d his
Works, yet I believe they are to be understood of some Pieces
printed by him in distinct and small Volumes, and not after
the Method that was follow’d by Successors. For Richard
Pynson, in his Preface to his Edition of the Canterbury Tales
(which we have amongst Mr. Selden’s MSS., and contains
nothing else) acquaints us, that he printed them from a Copy,
that was prepar’d for the Press by his Master William Caxton,
but gives not the least Hint that they had been before
printed. Caxton and Pynson having spent their time so
successfully upon Chaucer, and so much to the Content and
Approbation of learned Men, others were soon animated to
[p. 598] advance and promote what they had begun; and accordingly
several Editions follow’d with Improvements, as you have
particularly specify’d in your Paper: but Caxton and Pynson
were exceeded in their Labours by William Botevil, alias
Thinne, Esq., who having collected all the old Copies of
Chaucer that he could any ways procure, and having with great
Exactness corrected a vast number of Places, and made con¬
siderable Additions, amongst which must not be passed by his
Notes and Explications, publish’d the Work in one Volume in
Folio in the Year¹ MDXL. (not in MDXLII. as Mr. Wood insinu¬
ates²) which was printed at London by Thomas Bertholet [sic],
as is noted by Mr. Leland,³ and dedicated to K. H. VIII.
Twenty Years after this John Stow⁴ the Antiquary collated
this edition with several MSS. (some of which, I suppose,
are part of those that had been collected a great many Years
before by John Shirley Esq., who died in the Year MCCCCLVI⁵
and not in MCCCCLXV. as you mistake) added some Pieces not
printed before, and in the Year MDXCVII. joyn’d to him divers
Poëms of Lidgate; which being done, he drew up an Account
of Chaucer’s Life, of his Prefermentc, Issue and Death, collected
out of Records in the Tower and other Places, which he at
length communicated to Thomas Speght, who publish’d him
the same Year, with the said Improvements of Stow and his
own, and methodiz’d his Life according to his own Judgement.
After this Francis Thinne, Lancaster-Herald at Arms, a
Person very well vers’d in Antiquities, and descended, as it
seems,⁶ from the before mentioned William Thinne, but not
[p. 599] his Son as is affirm’d by Speght in his Life of Chaucer, corrected
this Edition in abundance of Places, drew up several Notes to
it, and put them into the Hands of the said Mr. Speght, who
remitted them into another Edition of Chaucer printed in
Folio in MDCII. which is the most compleat Edition we have
yet, and, besides the Explication of old and obscure Words,
contains great Variety of Improvements, that were not in
former Impressions. But I shall not trouble you with a
Catalogue of the Editions of Chaucer, which you are acquainted
¹ See Stow’s Annals Edit. fol. p. 326, and Mr. Leland de Scriptorib.
in vita Chauceri.
Athenæ Oxon., vol. i, col. 53.  ³Loco citato.
⁴ See his Annals loc. cit.
⁶ See Wood’s Athenæ Oxon., vol. i, col. 320.
⁵ See Stow’s Survey of London, p. 416.
with far better than I can pretend to. I shall, however, if I
meet with any Edition, that you have not specify’d, let you
know of it; and in the mean time I must take notice, that I
have seen some Pieces of him printed separately that you
have not mention’d, and ’tis likely I may meet with others
hereafter in my Searches. Amongst Mr. Selden’s printed
Books in the Bodleian Library is a Quarto Collection of old
Romantick Pieces, the first of which is, The story of the noble
Kynge Richard Cure de Lyon, pr. at London by Wynkyn de
Worde an. MDXXVIII.  The Author’s name is not added, and
therefore ’tis put down in Dr. Hyde’s Catalogue as an
anonymous Tract; but, upon consulting the Book, I find, that
some body, perhaps one that was formerly Owner of it, has
writ the following Words at the Beginning, By Jeffree Charsher
Pooet Laret. What Authority he had for this, I will not
pretend to guess; but I thought fit to give you an account of
it, that you may, at your leisure, examine into it. In the
same Library we have another Collection of old English Pieces,
which was also Mr. Selden’s, in which is the Ploughman’s
Tale, with a short Exposition of the Words and Matters, pr.
at Lond, MDCVI. Quarto. This Exposition is very usefull, and
the Author, who, it may be, was the said Francis Thinne,
[p. 600] shews himself to be a Man of Skill, and to have been a Master
of Chaucer. Besides these two Pieces, I must hint to you,
that the famous Mr. Elias Ashmole has printed, The Tale of
the Chanon’s Yeoman, in his Theatrum Chem.¹ [see above, 1652,
p. 227]  (before which he has put Chaucer’s Picture and
Epitaph from Westminster-Abbey) and that in his Museum
at Oxford is The Miller’s Tale, and The Tale of the Wife of
Bath, with Comments, pr. at London in MDCLXV. [see ante, 1665,
p. 242] which last I have not yet seen; but I shall take the
first opportunity to do it, and I will not fail to let you
know the Issue of my Inquiry.
§3. Whonever-
theless have not
But notwithstanding these excellent
been so exact in
Persons Labours were so successfull, as that
their Editions,
they may seem, perhaps, to some to have
but that they
might be still cor¬
superseded all future Attempts, yet I may
rected and sup¬
with Modesty assert, that a much more
ply’d from MSS.
and some Tracts
correct and compleat Edition of Chaucer
added that were
might be given than any that has hitherto
never yet pub¬
lish’d.
appear’d. I have consulted some of our
Oxford MSS. and find that the Print is in a
¹ Pag. 227.
great many Places corrupted, that in other Places whole Verses
are wanting, which might by these Helps be supply’d, that
sometimes the Titles of the Tales are chang’d, and that, lastly,
intire Tracts might be added, that were never yet made publick.
I took more particular notice of one MS. there, ¹ which is a
Collection of Poëms, some whereof bear Chaucer’s name, and
others have no name at all, which, nevertheless, I take to
have been written by him, as being in the same Style, and all
in the same Hand, which I guess to have been of the very
Age of Chaucer. From this Collection, from those that were
in Mr. Stow’s Library, from that mention’d by Mr. Edw.
Philips in his Theatrum Poëtarum [see above, 1675, p. 250],
[p. 601] and from a multitude of others, we might, in all likelyhood,
make another intire Volume of Chaucer in Folio.
§4. A Frag¬
I shall not give myself the Trouble of
ment of The
Squire’s Tale,
multiplying Instances, to confirm what is
with a Passage at
before asserted, since those cannot but be
the End of The
Parson’s Tale, by
obvious to every one, that shall have the
which Chaucer
Curiosity to inspect and examine a little the
revokes some of
MSS.  Yet I think it proper at present to
his Works.
inform you, that as the Prologue of the
Squire’s Tale, in an excellent MS. of Mr. Selden’s,² is quite
different from that in the Print, so there are eight Verses in
the Tale itself, which are not in the Common Editions. For
whereas we have receiv’d as yet but two Verses of the third
Part, with a Note signifying, that none of the rest, notwith¬
standing diligently sought after, could be recover’d, we have
here the following ones, which immediately precede the two
already printed, viz.
But I here now wol maken a knotte,
To the tome it come nexte to my lotte.
for here ben felawes behynde an hepe truly,
That wolden talke fnl besily,
And habe here sporte, as wel as I,
And the day passith certeynly.
Therefore Oste taketh now good hede,
Who shal nexte telle, and late him spede.
And whereas you mention a Passage, intit’led Penitentia ut
dicitur pro fabula Rectoris, by which Chaucer revok’d several
¹ Inter Codd. Fairfaxii, num. 16.
³ Arch. B. 30, in Bibl. Bodl.
of his Books, that you found printed in an Edition of his
Poëms with Mr. Tanner, which you have not seen in any
other, I must, withall, acquaint you, that I have found the
[p. 602] same Revocation in a¹ MS. in the Bodleian Library, which
because it is fuller than that you mention, and somewhat
different, I shall transcribe at large. How prey I to hem
all, that herken this litul tretise or reden, that if ther be
any thing in it, that liketh hem, that thereof thei thanken
our Lorde Ihesu Crist, of whom procedeth alle witte and
all goodenesse. And if there be anything, that displese
hem, I prey hem also, that thei arrecte it to the defante of
myn unkonnyng, and not to my will, that wold fayne habe
seid better, if I hadde konnyng: for our boke seith, that
al that is written for oure doctrine, & that is myn entent.
... [Here the whole passage is given which is printed at the
end of the Persones Tale, ll. 1082-92.]
This Passage immediately follows these words, And the
rest by trabaile and the life by deth and mortification of
[p. 603] Syn, and is so continued with the Tale, as if it were part of
it; but tho’ this Revocation be also extant in the above men¬
tion’d MS. of Mr. Selden, yet it is written as distinct from the
Tales, which conclude with that of the Parson. For thus
it is brought in, Here enden the Talis of Caunturbury, and
next thautour taketh leue. — How preye I to hem alle &c.
So that it begins just as that which I have transcrib’d
above; but however is much shorter, ending with the Booke
of Seint Valenty.
Besides the Tracts said in this Revocation to have been
written by Chaucer, and the Difference of
§ 5. This Revo¬
cation seems not
the three Copies, viz. our two, and that in
genuine, but to
Mr. Tanner’s Book, we may observe, that
have been added
by the Monks.
the Scribe has intit’led himself to a share in
the Petition: whence I begin to think,
that the Revocation is not genuine, but that it was made
by the Monks. For not only the Regular, but Secular,
Clergy were exasperated against Chaucer, for the Freedom he
had taken to expose their Lewdness and Debauchery; but
nothing gave them so much offense, as the Plowman’s Tale,
in which he has, in lively Colours, describ’d their Pride,
Covetousness, and abominable Lusts, and shew’d that the
¹ Inter Codd.  Caroli Hattoni, num. 1.
Pope is Anti-Christ, and they his Ministers. Such a Satyr,
made by a Person of his Note and Distinction, and so much
celebrated for his wonderfull fine Parts and exquisite Learning
and Judgement, could not but work mightily upon them,
especially when many of them had arriv’d at so high a Pitch
of Wickedness, and were, as it were, drown’d in Sloath and
Luxury, being much worse now than their Predecessors above
three hundred Years before, when most of even the Bishops
themselves were illiterate, tho’ ador’d and flatter’d upon
account of their Dignity and unbounded Wealth, and attended
[p. 604] upon by an amazing Number of Servants and Sycophants.
............
§6. If it be sup¬
But if, notwithstanding, what has been
pos’d to be authen¬
tick, ’tis likely
alleg’d, it be suppos’d, that this Revocation
’twas written by
is authentick, and that ’twas penn’d by
Chaucer towards
the latter end of
Chaucer himself, we may then conjecture,
Richard the
that ’twas done by him towards the latter
second’s Reign, he
end of the Reign of Richard II. when
being then old
and in disgrace,
having lost the favour of his Prince, and
for striking in
most of his noble Friends here, and being,
with the Multi¬
tude in some dan¬
withall, grown old, he retired himself from
[p. 605] gerous Enterprize.
the Pleasures of the World, and reflected
seriously upon the Changes and Infirmities
to which humane Nature is subject. This Consideration, with
the thoughts of a future State, could not but make him
renounce the Vanities of this Life, and retract those Passages,
which he perceiv’d, either bad [done] or might do Mischief to
Religion and Morality. After which he became quite weary
of this Life, and seem’d to have no relish for any thing in it;
tho’ that may be attributed chiefly, perhaps, to the Mis¬
fortunes which happen’d to him, he and his Lands being
taken into the King’s Protection in the second Year of his
Reign, because of some danger that seem’d to threaten from
his favouring and striking in with the rash Attempts of
the common-place. Whatever this Attempt was, whether
Rebellion, or something bordering upon it, ’tis certain he
forfeited the Love of his Prince and most of his Friends,
and he was forced to lead afterwards a melancholy Life,
which often extorted from him grievous Complaints, parti¬
cularly of his own Rashness in following the Multitude, and
sometimes would wish to exchange Life for Death,¹ which
¹ This may be seen in the Complaint he made to his empty Purse, which
Mr. Speght found ten times larger in Mr. Stow’s MS. than in the Print.
Misery, however, was fortunate in this, that it prepar’d him
the better for Eternity, and influenced him to retract all the
loose Things in his Writings.
Now the Plough-man’s Tale having given
§7. The reason
more offence than all the rest of Chaucer’s
why the Plough-
Works, perhaps that is the reason why it
man’s Tale is
found but in few
appears in so few MSS. I have not
MSS. Some think
found it in one of those I have consulted at
’twas not Chau¬
cer’s, but if his,
Oxford, which has made some think, that
it is improperly
’tis not Chaucer’s, and this they believe
call’d a Tale.
confirm’d from the Style, which is different
from his other Poëms. Mr. Pitts confounds it with the
Satyr, that is call’d Piers Plowman; but the Publishers have
skillfully ascrib’d it to him, being warranted from a MS. in
Mr. Stow’s Library; tho’ it must be confessed, that ’tis not
properly term’d a Tale, and it does not seem to have been put
as one of the Tales by the Author himself: for they were
suppos’d¹ to have been spoken and not written, as this is
plainly said to be, the Plowman concluding thus:
To holy Church I will me bow,
Each man to amend him Christ send space:
And for my writing me allow
He, that is almighty, for his Grace.
The same word of writing is there made use of several
times: as, for my writing if I habe blame —and,
Of my writing have me excused: which seems to me an
undeniable Argument, that it was not delivered as all the
rest were.
I might from this occasion insist upon divers others Parti¬
culars, but I have already exceeded the Bounds of a Letter,
and I am afraid I have quite tired your Patience. I hope,
however, you will take what I have said as an instance of my
Readiness to serve you, being, with all sincerity,
Sir,
Your very humble Servant,
Tho. Hearne.
[A MS. note by W. Thomas in Urry’s edn. of Chaucer’s Works, 1721, B.M. pr. m.
643. m. 4, on blank leaf to f. p. 32, states that this letter was written in 1709.]
¹ See a Note at the Beginning of the Tales in MS. (in Bibl. Bodl. inter Codd.
Laud. K. 50) by John Barcham. [See above, 1642, pp. 221-2.]