1714. Urry, John. Sketch of a Preface [to] Edition of Chaucer's Works,
not published until 1721 [q.v. below, pp. 353-6], also some
remarks, quoted by Timothy Thomas in his Preface to Urry's
Chaucer 1721, [q. v.], also a note before the Coke’s Tale of Gamelyn,
Urry's edn. of Chaucer's Works, 1721, p. 36. [For the licence for
Urry's edition, dated 20 July, 1714, see below, App. A., 1714.]
[Quoted at end of the Preface as being Urry's own Words to
the Reader:—] If this is the First Edition of Chaucer that
ever thou didst read, it will be to little purpose to tell thee
what pains I have been at to fit out this Edition for thee,
Thou wilt, maybe, not thank me for what I have done, and
complain of me for having left so much undone. All this I do
believe thou mayst do justly : But if thou hast read any of
the former Editions, thou wilt be my witness that I have been
at some trouble in settling the Text, and giving Metre to the
Poet's Verse, in collating many MSS., and not a few Printed
Books, writing out Indexes, looking over a great many
Dictionaries for words I could not find, as well as for words
I could. In short, if thou ever wert an Editor of such Books
thou wilt have some compassion on my failings, being sensible
ot the toil of such sort of creatures; and if thou art not yet
an Editor, I beg truce of thee till thou art one, before thou
censurest my Endeavours.
[Note before Tale of Gamelyn which, in the annotated copy,
has "Urry" in Thomas’s handwriting at foot.]
[p. 36] So many of the MSS. have this Tale, that I can hardly
think it could be unknown to the former Editors of this Poet's
Works. Nor can I think of a Reason why they neglected to
publish it. Possibly they met only with those MSS. that had
not this Tale in them, and contented themselves with the
Number of Tales they found in those MSS. If they had any
of those MSS. in which it is, I cannot give a Reason why
they did not give it a Place amongst the rest, unless they
doubted of its being genuine. But because I find it in so
many MSS., I have no doubt of it, and therefore make it
publick, and call it the Fifth Tale. In all the MSS. it is
called the Cooke's Tale, and therefore I call it so in like
manner : But had I found it without an Inscription, and had
been left to my Fancy to have bestow'd it on which of the
Pilgrims I had pleas’d, I should certainly have adjudg’d it to
the Squire's Yeoman; who tho as minutely describ'd by
Chaucer, and characteriz'd in the third Place, yet I find no
Tale of his in any of the MSS. And because I think there is
not any one that would fit him so well as this, I have ventur'd
to place his Picture before this Tale, tho' I leave the Cook in
Possession of the Title.