
1808] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 37
... It appears to me, however, an interesting question: Who
taught Thomas Occleve to paint?
letters, in which there are further brief but unimportant references to Chaucer.]
[This pamphlet was re-issued in 1818 with the addition of dedicatory and other
[1808.] Coleridge, Samuel Taylor. Notes written in Lamb's copy of
❝ The Poetical Works of Mr. Samuel Daniel,❞ 2 vols., 1718, [printed
in] Notes and Queries, Aug. 7, 1852, vol. vi, p. 118. [Also quoted
by E. V. Lucas, Life of Charles Lamb, vol. ii, pp. 316-7.]
[Note on 4th fly-leaf :]
Is it from any hobby-horsical love of our old writers (and
of such a passion respecting Chaucer, Spenser, and Ben Jonson,
I have occasionally seen glaring proofs in one the string of
whose shoe I am not worthy to unloose), or is it a real Beauty,
the interspersion I mean (in stanza poems) of rhymes from
polysyllables–such as Eminence, Obedience, Reverence?
1808. [Cromek, Robert Hartley ?] The Procession of Chaucer’s Pilgrims
to Canterbury. Proposals for publishing, by subscription, a print,
from the well-known cabinet picture on that subject, by Thomas
Stothard, Esq., R.A., to be executed... by Louis Schiavonetti, etc.,
[appended to Blair’s] The Grave, Cromek, 1808.
[The reputation of Chaucer as the reformer of the English
language, etc., justifies the Proprietor in presenting all the
characters of the Canterbury Tales, the most pleasing of his
works.
Description of the picture, giving a few words to each
character. The Ploughman is called the Old Ploughman, and
the Squire the Fop of Chaucer's Age; a Goldsmith is intro¬
duced. See, for criticism of all this, Blake’s Descriptive Cata¬
logue, below, 1809. It is claimed that “the costume of each
Person is correct with an antiquarian exactness," Douce's
Illustrations of Shakespeare being quoted is support of the
statement; also a note states that the portrait of Chaucer is
painted from that by Occleve in the British Museum.
Appended is a letter from John Hoppner to Richard Cumber¬
land, q.v. above, 1807.]
1808. Jamieson, John. An Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish
Language: illustrating the words in their different Significations by
Examples from Ancient and Modern Writers... Edinburgh,
2 vols.
[There are a certain number of Chaucer references and quo¬
tations all through the Dictionary; there are 13 such references
in the first 20 pages.]
