
1817] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 89
something hard and dry in them. What is the most wonderful
thing in Shakespear's faculties is their excessive sociability,
and how they gossiped and compared notes together.
[Passages from each poet are cited and compared.]
1817. Hunt, James Henry Leigh. The Round Table: by William
Hazlitt [and Leigh Hunt], 2 vols., 1817, vol. i, pp. 15-16 [Intro¬
duction], p. 186 [Essay on the Poetical Character].
[p. 15] It must not be concealed, that both Shakespeare and
Milton have owed a great part of their reputation of late years
to causes which... have been unconnected with a direct
poetical taste... Milton still remains unknown to the
better classes,... and Chaucer and Spenser, the two other
great poets of England,... are scarcely known at all...
Chaucer is considered as a rude sort of poet, who wrote a vast
while ago, and is no longer intelligible... Chaucer is
nothing but old Chaucer or honest Geoffrey...
[p.186] It is not one of the least curious instances of the native
spirit of this country, that three out of its four greatest poets
— Chaucer, Spenser, and Milton–have been men of busy
action in the political world,–that two out of the three were
unequivocally on the side of freedom, and helped to procure
us our present enjoyments.  ... Thomson was of a cheerful
temperament... and so was Chaucer, till he got into prison
in his old age.
1817. Hunt, James Henry Leigh. On Chaucer, [Essay No. xvi, in] The
Round Table: by William Hazlitt [and Leigh Hunt], 2 vols.,
vol. i, pp. 124-41.
[Leigh Hunt discusses the possibility of a modern poet being
able to complete Chaucer's Squire's Tale. He thinks it would
be difficult to find any one capable of doing it satisfactorily.
He goes on to deal with what appears to him the best method
of modernizing Chaucer, which is little more than a change of
spelling, and he gives examples of this from the Squire’s Tale.]
1817. Keats, John. Sonnet; written on a blank space at the end of
Chaucer's Tale of “The Floure and the Lefe." [This transcript is
from Keats’s holograph in Cowden Clarke’s Chaucer, and gives
his punctuation and use of capital letters. First printed in The
Examiner, March 16, 1817.] (Complete Works of John Keats, ed.
H. Buxton Forman, 1900-1, 5 vols., vol. ii, pp. 175-6.)
This pleasant Tale is like a little copse
The honied Lines do freshly interlace
To keep the Reader in so sweet a place
