
72 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1815
1815. Macaulay, Thomas Babington, Lord. Letter to his Mother,
[dated] Aug. 23, 1815, [in] The Life and Letters of Lord Macaulay
by... George Otto Trevelyan, 1876. (New ed., 1883, 2 vols.,
vol. i, p. 59.)
Hear and wonder! I have... read Boccaccio's Decameron
... he is always elegant, amusing, and... strikingly delicate
and chastised. I prefer him infinitely to Chaucer.
1815. Marsh, Herbert. Horæ Pelasgicæ, Part the First, p. 23.
[The Pelasgi spoke] the same language with Thucydides
himself, though the form of it, as used by the Pelasgi, might
bear to the form of it in the writings of Thucydides a relation
similar to that, which the English of Chaucer bears to the
English of Pope.
July, 1815, vol. xiii, p. 346.]
[This passage is quoted in a review of Marsh's book in the Quarterly Review
1815. Mitford, Mary Russell. Letter to Sir William Elford, July 7,
Life of Mary Russell Mitford, edited by A. G. L’Estrange, 3 vols.,
1870, vol. i, pp. 311, 312.
I have been to see Donnington Castle, the classic ground
where Chaucer certainly resided and perhaps wrote some of
those exquisite tales which, while they are among the earliest
specimens of our language, will undoubtedly endure to the last.
Are you an enthusiast for this venerable bard? My admiration
for him is very ardent. His poetry seems to me so healthy,
so vigorous, so much in the thought, and so little in the
expression; his powers are so various, so pliable, ranging at
will from the thrilling pathos of Griselda to the wild fancy
of  ‘Cambuscan bold.’  ... Setting Milton and Shakespeare
aside, I am not sure that I don't prefer him to almost any
writer in the circle of English poetry. I speak, of course, of
his best works, and not of his poems en masse; but two or
three of his “Canterbury Tales,” and some select passages from
his other productions, are worth all that the age of Queen
Anne, our Augustan age as it has been called, ever produced.
[Enclosed in this letter was the following Sonnet:]
On visiting Donnington Castle, said to have been the latest
Residence of Chaucer, and celebrated for its Resistance
to the Army of the Parliament during the Civil Wars.
Oh for some sprite to lead the ivy band,
High-seated Donnington, around thy towers!
Oh for some sprite to wipe from Chaucer's bowers
The lingering trace of War's deforming hand!
