
86 [Coleridge] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1817
in its different eras; first, from Chaucer to Milton; second,
from Dryden inclusive to Thomson; and third, from Cowper
to the present day; I changed my plan and confined my
disquisition to the two former eras.
[ch.x, I received as many lessons in the Gothic of Ulphilas as
p.203]
sufficed to make me acquainted with its grammar, and...I
read through... the most important remains of the Theo¬
tiscan, or the transitional state of the Teutonic language from
the Gothic to the old German of the Swabian period...
(the polished dialect of which is analogous to that of our
Chaucer)...
[p. 205] In Pindar, Chaucer, Dante, Milton, and many more, we
have instances of the close connection of poetic genius with
the love of liberty and of genuine reformation.
[Vol. ii, p. 79]
. . . . . . . . . .
p. 79]
[Defence of the use of mythological personages by the older
poets.] Nay, even at this day what scholar of genial taste will
not so far sympathise with them, as to read with pleasure in
Petrarch, Chaucer, or Spenser, what he would perhaps condemn
[Vol. ii, In truth our language is, and from the first dawn of
as puerile in a modern poet?
ch. xx,
p. 97] poetry ever has been, particularly rich in compositions dis¬
tinguished by this excellence [i. e. a natural style and an apt
expression of thought, combined with the rhyme and metre
of poetry]. The final e, which is now mute, in Chaucer's
age was either sounded or dropped indifferently.... Let the
reader, then, only adopt the pronunciation of the poet and of
the court, at which he lived, both with respect to the final e
and to the accentuation of the last syllable: I would then
venture to ask, what even in the colloquial language of
elegant and unaffected women (who are the peculiar mistresses
of “pure English and undefiled")–what could we hear more
natural, or seemingly more unstudied, than the following
stanzas from Chaucer's Troilus and Creseide?
"And after this forth to the gate he wente,
Ther as Creseide out rode a ful gode paas:
And up and doun there made he many a wente," &c.,
[42 lines quoted, bk. v, stanzas 87-91, 93.]
[Wordsworth included this latter passage in his 'Selections
from Chaucer modernised,' written 1801.]
