
138 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1822
[p. 406] "the ancient host of the Tabard, giving them his farewell
God-send to Canterbury"; Irving having apparently for¬
gotten that the host accompanied the pilgrims, and that he is
not described by Chaucer as old.]
1822. [Laing, David.] Select Remains of the Ancient Popular Poetry of
Scotland. [The book is without pagination. There are various
Chaucer references in the Introductions by Laing : Prefatory
note to The Pystyll of Swete Susan. On northern poets' use of
alliteration ; Laing quotes Chaucer's ‘rum, ram, ruf,’ Parson’s
Prol., l. 43, and also Gascoigne’s reference to it, q.v. above, 1575,
vol. i, p. 110.] No. 12: The Tale of Colkelbie Sow, p. 1 n. For
the reference in the text of Colkelbie Sow, (ll. 852-3) see above
[1440?], vol. i., p. 44. Appendix, p. 14.
1822. Nares, Robert. A Glossary... of words... in the works of
English authors. Preface, p. vi.
I have carefully abstained from inserting the words and
phrases of an earlier period than the reign of Elizabeth, except
where the writers of her time at all affected the phraseology
of Chaucer; which affectation, in my opinion, is almost the
only blemish of the beautiful poems of Spenser. My reason
was this; that, to complete the rational view and knowledge
of our language, a separate dictionary must be required, for
the works of Chaucer, Gower, Lydgate, Occleve, and all those
writers who can properly be called English; that is, who
wrote when the language was no longer Saxon. [A Saxon
and a British Dictionary would complete the historical view
of the language.]
1822. P. Chaucer's Monument, [in] The Gentleman's Magazine, Sept.,
vol. cxii, p. 221.
On my visit to Westminster Abbey, in July last, I was
much disappointed at the slight shown to the monument of
my old favourite Poet, Geoffrey Chaucer, the father of English
Poesy. I did expect, among other repairs and restorations, to
have seen this tomb noticed, at least the inscription made
legible, and the figure of the old Bard restored, which have
long been nearly obliterated; but it is at present merely
coloured black, probably the restoration will follow; decency
demands something should be done. [The inscription on
Chaucer's tomb is then given; with a mistake in the third
line of "mortis" for "vitae."]
