
10 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1803
1803. Lamb, Charles. Two Letters to William Godwin, [dated] Nov. 8
[and] Nov. 10, 1803. (Works of Charles and Mary Lamb, ed.
E. V. Lucas, 1903-5, 7 vols, vol. vi, pp. 281-2.)
Nov. 8, 1803.
MY DEAR SIR,—I have been sitting down for three or
four days successively to the review [of Godwin's Life of
Chaucer], which I so much wished to do well, and to your
satisfaction. But I can produce nothing but absolute flatness
and nonsense. My health and spirits are so bad, and my
nerves so irritable, that I am sure, if I persist, I shall teaze
myself into a fever....
You will give me great satisfaction by sealing my pardon
and oblivion in a line or two, before I come to see you, or I
shall be ashamed to come.
Your, with great truth,
C. Lamb.
Nov. 10, 1803.
DEAR GODWIN,— You never made a more unlucky and per¬
verse mistake than to suppose that the reason of my not
writing that cursed thing was to be found in your book. I
assure you most sincerely that I have been greatly delighted
with Chaucer. I may be wrong, but I think there is one
considerable error runs through it, which is a conjecturing
spirit, a fondness for filling out the picture by supposing what
Chaucer did and how he felt, where the materials are scanty.
So far from meaning to withhold from you (out of mistaken
tenderness) this opinion of mine, I plainly told Mrs. Godwin
that I did find a fault, which I should reserve naming until I
should see you and talk it over. This she may very well
remember, and also that I declined naming this fault until
she drew it from me by asking me if there was not too much
fancy in the work. I then confessed generally what I felt.
... I remember also telling Mrs. G. (which she may have
dropt) that I was by turns considerably more delighted than
I expected.... I even had conceived an expression to meet
you with, which was thanking you for some of the most
exquisite pieces of criticism I had ever read in my life. In
particular I should have brought forward that on“Troilus and
Cressida" and Shakespear, which it is little to say delighted
me, and instructed me.... All these things I was preparing
