
1819] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 111
[vol. i,  Chaucer was probably known and distinguished as a poet
pp. 70 -
2]
anterior to the appearance of Langlande's Visions. Indeed if
he had produced nothing else than his youthful poem, "the
Court of Love," it was sufficient to indicate one destined to
harmonise and refine the national strains. But it is likely,
that before his thirty-fourth year, about which time Langlande's
Visions may be supposed to have been finished, Chaucer had
given several compositions to the public.
[Campbell continues that the simple old narrative romance
had become too familiar to invite Chaucer, and the poverty of
English had obliged him to seek models in Latin and foreign
tongues. Ovid, Claudian, Statius and Boethius were the
favourite Latins, by the allegory of the last two of whom he
was influenced, as by the French allegorical romances. The
dreams, emblems, etc., of this last visionary school proved too
light and playful for his strong genius, though in this work,
too, his peculiar grace and gaiety are conspicuous. The Hous
of Fame and Flower and Leaf are examples. His similar
poems, even the most fantastic in design, are relieved by
fresh and joyous descriptions of nature.  ... Chaucer was
subsequently drawn to the style of Boccaccio.]
. . . . . . . . . .
[vol. ii, [Tyrwhitt had vindicated Chaucer from the charge brought
pp. 18,
14]
against him by Verstegan, etc., of having adulterated English
with French words. Such revolutions in language are not
wrought by individuals; and Chaucer's style will compare
with that of Gower, Wyclif and Mandeville.]
 . . . . . . . . . .
[p.15]... He has a double claim to rank as the founder of English
poetry, from having been the first to make it the vehicle of
spirited representations of life and native manners, and from
having been the first great architect of our versification, in
giving our language the ten syllable, or heroic measure, which,
though it may sometimes be found among the lines of more
ancient versifiers, evidently comes in only by accident. This
measure occurs in the earliest poem that is attributed to him,
The Court of Love.  ... It is a dream, in which the poet
fancies himself taken to the Temple of Love, introduced to a
mistress, and sworn to observe the statutes of the amatory
[p. 16] god. As the earliest work of Chaucer, it interestingly ex¬
hibits the successful effort of his youthful hand in erecting a
new and stately fabric of English numbers. As a piece of
