
1811] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 53
1811. Collier, John Payne. Extract from Diary for Oct. 29, 1811, [in]
Lectures and Notes on Shakspere and Milton... by Samuel
Taylor Coleridge, now first collected by T. Ashe (Bohn’s Standard
Library), 1883. Introductory, p. 15.
Coleridge told us... that he means very soon to give a
series of lectures at Coachmakers' Hall mainly upon Poetry
... [They] would, necessarily, embrace criticisms on Shak¬
spere, Milton, and all the chief and most popular poets of our
language, from Chaucer, for whom he had great reverence,
down to Campbell, for whom he had little admiration.
[For Notes of Coleridge’s Lectures, see below, 1818.]
1811. Douce, Francis. Preface to The Customs of London, otherwise
called Arnold’s Chronicle, p. X.
In an anonymous, but by no means incurious, Liliputian
volume, published about the year 1763, and intitled, 'A
short account of the first rise and progress of Printing, with
a compleat list of the first books that were printed,’ is the
following confused and extraordinary passage– The author is
speaking, though most inaccurately, of Arnold’s Chronicle.—
‘In this the Nut-brown Maid, supposed by Chaucer as Skelton
confirms, by having had a copy given him by Lidgate, Monk
of Bury. Mr. Prior has made a paraphrase on it, and has
also printed it from the old English, but knew not that it was
by Chaucer;... The author... seems to quote this un¬
accountable jargon from ‘Lord Pembroke's manuscript notes
before his Book of St. Albans‘ ... Adopting, probably, the
mistake of the above writer, the editor of a work intitled,
‘Mêlanges de poésie Angloise,‘  1764, 12°, has given a very
dull prose translation of Prior's beautiful version, which he
calls ‘Poème imité de la Belle Brune, de Chaucer.’ So much
for French accuracy!
[See below, App. A. [1763], for the ‘Short Account,’ and below, end of App. B.,
for the ‘Mêlanges.’]
[1811.] Dyer, George. On the Connection and Mutual Assistance of the
Arts and Sciences, and the Relation of Poetry to them all, [in] The
Reflector, vol. i, no. ii, art. vii, p. 358.
... Chaucer, the first of our poets, on reference to the
change of our language from the Saxon, of much account,
was well acquainted with all the literature of his time, and
with something better.
