
78 [Nott] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1815
of imitating or translating with spirit and originality. [Here
follow several examples of translated passages:
(1) Troilus, Bk. ii, v. 1030, beginning:
For though the best// harper upon live
Would on the best// sowned joly harp...
which lines, says Dr. Nott, are 'an imperfect imitation of
two passages from Horace' in which Chaucer comprehends
his author's meaning, and applies it to his subject with
considerable skill; but we look in vain for the point and
[p. ccxliii] (2) Translation from Petrarch’s Sonnet 102, in Troil. and
terseness of the original.
Cress., Bk. i, ed. 1532:
If no love is, oh God! // what feel I so, &c.
in which the words are so ill chosen where the version is close;
and where it is paraphrastic the circumstances added are
selected with so little taste, and expressed with so little
elegance, that the spirit of the original is lost.]
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. ccxliv] A still more striking proof of Chaucer's want of taste in
translation occurs in his Canterbury Tales, where he attempts
a version of Dante's famous story of Ugolino.... With what
prosaical tameness and meanness of circumstance does he
paraphrase the... lines, in which Ugolino describes how
his suspicion was excited as to the fate which awaited his
unfortunate family and himself.
Sect. XVI. Of the further improvements made by Surrey
in our Poetry...
[p. ccxlvii] All our poets previous to Surrey wrote as if no other
manners, ideas, or modes of life ever had existed, or ever
could exist than those with which they themselves were
conversant. . . .
[p. ccxlix] That limited taste... pervaded the whole of Chaucer's
Knight's Tale. Who must not feel the first principles of good
taste violated, when he is told that Dan Arcite was a 'lusty
bachelor,' chamberlain and squire principal to Duke Theseus;
that the said Duke found Arcite and Palamon in the woods
when he went thither himself 'amaying;' and that he
learnt Arcite's passion by hearing him sing a Roundel in praise
of love, and talk of purgatory?
. . . . . . . . . .
