
100 [Hazlitt] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1818
descriptions in his account of Palamon when left alone in his
cell:
‘Swiche sorrow he maketh that the grete tour
Resouned of his yelling and clamour,
The pure fetters on his shinnes grete
Were of his bitter salte teres wete.’
[Knight's Tale, ll. 419-22.]
[p. 22] The mention of this last circumstance looks like a part of the
instructions he had to follow, which he had no discretionary
power to omit or introduce at pleasure. He is contented to
find grace and beauty in truth. He exhibits for the most
part the naked object, with little drapery thrown over it.
His metaphors, which are few, are not for ornament, but use,
and as like as possible to the things themselves. He does
not affect to show his power over the reader's mind, but the
power which his subject has over his own. The readers of
Chaucer's poetry feel more nearly what the persons he
describes must have felt, than perhaps those of any other
poet. His sentiments are not voluntary effusions of the poet's
fancy, but founded on the natural impulses and habitual
prejudices of the characters he has to represent. There is an
inveteracy of purpose, a sincerity of feeling, which never
relaxes or grows vapid, in whatever they do or say. There
is no artificial, pompous display, but a strict parsimony of the
poet's materials, like the rude simplicity of the age in which
he lived. His poetry resembles the root just springing from
the ground, rather than the full-blown flower. His muse is
no ‘babbling gossip of the air,’ fluent and redundant; but,
like a stammerer, or a dumb person, that has just found the
use of speech, crowds many things together with eager haste,
with anxious pauses, and fond repetitions to prevent mistake.
His words point as an index to the objects, like the eye or
finger. There were none of the common-places of poetic
diction in our author’s time, no reflected lights of fancy, no
borrowed roseate tints; he was obliged to inspect things
for himself, to look narrowly, and almost to handle the
object, as in the obscurity of morning we partly see and
partly grope our way; so that his descriptions have a sort of
tangible character belonging to them, and produce the effect
of sculpture on the mind. Chaucer had an equal eye for
truth of nature and discrimination of character; and his
