
80 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1815-
specimen of romantic imagination to be found within the
compass of modern literature. But Chaucer's chief merit
consists in his knowledge of human nature and in his
power of delineating character. In humorous and satiric
portraits, we meet with the nicest touches of discrimination
between vice and foible that can well be imagined: and
in his heroic characters we find him constantly preserving
gradations of excellence even in those points where there is a
general resemblance. The Knight and the Squire, Palamon
[p. and Arcite, Demetrius of Inde, and Lycurgus of Thrace, are
cclxx]
all brave and enterprising; but each of them is an individual
of himself. Courage is the one common attribute of all.
But there are the same shades of difference in the courage of
each that Homer has been so often admired for preserving
in the characters of Ulysses and Antilochus; Diomed and
Patroclus; Ajax and Achilles. I know of no writer in
modern times, Shakespeare excepted, who can be compared
with Chaucer for masterly discrimination of character.
[Vol. ii, ... For though it is evident that he [Wyatt] had read
p. eliii]
Chaucer, and admired him, his imitations are neither frequent,
nor of a description to make us suppose that he took him as
his master, or considered him to be 'the well-head of English
undefiled.'
1815. Turner, Sharon. History of England, vol. ii.
[Part V, containing five chapters, is a “History of English
Poetry, from the twelfth century to the middle of the fifteenth."
Of these chapters, no. iv (pp. 499-538) concerns the “Life and Poems
of Chaucer,” and is based principally on Godwin and a study of the
text. There are many quotations, principally from the Testament,
Dream, Legende, Troilus, Assemble of Fowles, Complaint of the
Black Knight. A general account of the works is given. Other
references are:—
Chaucer's borrowings from Dante and Boccaccio, p. 480 and n.
Chaucer and Gower, pp. 481, 483, 488 n., 498 n.
Chaucer and Lydgate, pp. 540, 541, 545-8, 552, 555: Turner
considers Lydgate's versification superior to Chaucer's, p. 545.]
1815. Unknown. Chaucer's Dying Ode, [Flee from the prees...
"attempted in modern English,” in] The Monthly Repository,
May, vol. x, no. cxiii, p. 309.
[The text of Chaucer is given, followed by the modern¬
ization, of which the first stanza will serve for a specimen:]
