
1818] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Hazlitt] 101
interest in what he saw gave new distinctness and force to
his power of observation. The picturesque and the dramatic
are in him closely blended together, and hardly distinguish¬
able; for he principally describes external appearances as
indicating character, as symbols of internal sentiment. There
is a meaning in what he sees; and it is this which catches
his eye by sympathy. Thus the costume and dress of the
Canterbury Pilgrims–of the Knight–the Squire–the Oxford
Scholar–the Gap-toothed Wife of Bath, and the rest, speak
for themselves...
[Quotation, Prol. ll. 118-29, 136-55, 165-207, 321-2, 449-52.]
[p. 24] Chaucer, it has been said [by Blake, q.v. above, 1809],
. . . . . .
numbered the classes of men, as Linnæus numbered the
plants. Most of them remain to this day: others that are
obsolete... still live in his descriptions of them. Such
is the Sompnoure:
‘A Sompnoure was ther with us in that place,
That hadde a fire-red cherubinnes face‘
[and following twenty-five lines, Prol. ll. 623-69, 688].
[p. 25] It would be a curious speculation (at least for those who
think that the characters of men never change, though
manners, opinions, and institutions may) to know what has
become of this character of the Sompnoure in the present day;
whether or not it has any technical representative in existing
professions; into what channels and conduits it has with¬
drawn itself, where it lurks unseen in cunning obscurity, or
else shows its face boldly, pampered into all the insolence of
office, in some other shape, as it is deterred or encouraged by
circumstances. Chaucer's characters modernised, upon this
principle of historic derivation, would be an useful addition
to our knowledge of human nature. But who is there to
undertake it?...
[Quotation, Knight's Tale, ll. 1270-1328.]
[p. 26] Chaucer's descriptions of natural scenery possess the
[p. 27] same sort of characteristic excellence, or what might be
termed gusto. They have a local truth and freshness, which
gives the very feeling of the air, the coolness or moisture of
the ground. Inanimate objects are thus made to have a
fellow-feeling in the interest of the story; and render back
