
1818] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Hazlitt] 103
of Venus, and Diana, of the ornaments and ceremonies used
in each, with the reception given to the offerings of the
lovers, have a beauty and grandeur, much of which is lost in
Dryden’s version...
[Quotation, Knight’s Tale, ll. 1109-22.]
... The story of Griselda is in Boccaccio; but the Clerk of
Oxenforde, who tells it, professes to have learnt it from
Petrarch.  ... In spite of the barbarity of the circumstances,
which are abominable, the sentiment remains unimpaired and
unalterable. It is of that kind,  ‘that heaves no sigh, that
sheds no tear’; but it hangs upon the beatings of the heart;
it is a part of the very being; it is as inseparable from it as
the breath we draw. It is still and calm as the face of death.
Nothing can touch its ethereal purity: tender as the yielding
flower, it is fixed as the marble firmament. The only remon¬
strance she makes, the only complaint she utters against all
the ill-treatment she receives, is that single line where, when
turned back naked to her father's house, she says,
‘Let me not like a worm go by the way.’
[p. 31] The first outline given of the characters is inimitable:
‘Nought fer fro thilke paleis honourable’
[ten stanzas, Clerkes Tale, ll. 141-89, 218-38].
[p.32] The story of the little child slain in Jewry, (which is told
. . . . . . . . . .
by the Prioress, and worthy to be told by her who was ‘all
conscience and tender heart,’) is not less touching than that
of Griselda. It is simple and heroic to the last degree. The
poetry of Chaucer has a religious sanctity about it, connected
with the manners and superstitions of the age. It has all
the spirit of martyrdom.
It has also all the extravagance and the utmost licentiousness
of comic humour, equally arising out of the manners of the
time. In this too Chaucer resembled Boccaccio that he excelled
in both styles, and could pass at will 'from grave to gay,
from lively to severe;' but he never confounded the two
styles together (except from that involuntary and unconscious
mixture of the pathetic and humorous, which is almost always
to be found in nature), and was exclusively taken up with
what he set about, whether it was jest or earnest. The
