
102 [Hazlitt] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1818
the sentiment of the speaker's mind. One of the finest parts
in Chaucer is of this mixed kind. It is the beginning of the
Flower and the Leaf, where he describes the delight of that
young beauty, shrowded in her bower, and listening, in the
morning of the year to the singing of the nightingale.
[p. 28] It was the same trust in nature, and reliance on his
[Quotation, Floure and the Leaf, ed. Skeat, ll. 36-42, 78-133.]
[p. 29] patience of Griselda; the faith of Constance; and the heroic
subject, which enabled Chaucer to describe the grief and
perseverance of the little child, who, going to school through
the streets of Jewry,
‘Oh Alma Redemptoris mater, loudly sung,’ ¹
and who after his death, still triumphed in his song.
Chaucer has more of this deep, internal, sustained sentiment,
than any other writer, except Boccaccio. In depth of simple
pathos, and intensity of conception, never swerving from his
subject, I think no other writer comes near him, not even the
Greek tragedians.  ... I will take the following from the
Knight’s Tale. The distress of Arcite, in consequence of his
banishment from his love, is thus described:
‘Whan that Arcite to Thebes comen was,
Ful oft a day he swelt and said Alas,
[and fourteen following lines, Knight's Tale, ll. 497-513].
For sene his lady shall he never mo. ...’
This picture of the sinking of the heart, of the wasting
away of the body and mind, of the gradual failure of all the
faculties under the contagion of a rankling sorrow, cannot be
surpassed. Of the same kind is his farewel to his mistress,
after he has gained her hand and lost his life in the
combat:
Alas the wo! alas the peines stronge...
[and eight following lines, Knight's Tale, ll. 1913-21].
[p. 30] The death of Arcite is the more affecting, as it comes
after triumph and victory, after the pomp of sacrifice, the
solemnities of prayer, the celebration of the gorgeous rites
of chivalry. The descriptions of the three temples of Mars,
[ ¹ This line, which has two syllables too many, does not occur in the Prioresses
Tale.]
