
64 Five Hundred Years of
1814. Hunt, James Henry Leigh. The Feast of the Poets, with Notes
... by the Editor of the Examiner, p. 19, [Notes] pp. 121, 122.
[p. 19]
'Twould be tedious to count all the names as they rose,
But none were omitted you’Il eas'ly suppose,
Whom Fancy has crown’d with one twig of the bay,
From old father Chaucer to Collins and Gray.
. . . . . . .
[Notes]
[pp. 121,
Of the studious disposition of all our greatest poets we
122]
'have complete evidence. Chaucer's eagle in the House of
Fame accuses him of being so desperate a student, that he
takes no heed of anybody, and reads till he looks stupid;
[Here follows a quotation, beginning:]
... No tidinges comin to the,...
[and ending]
And al so dombe as any stone
Thou sittest at anothir boke,
Tyl fully dasid is thy loke. [v. 140]
Chaucer however, was too true a poet not to read nature as
well as books, as his writings abundantly testify, both in
character and description. Milton and Spenser were both
men of learning, and, what is rarer for poets, men of busi¬
ness; and so indeed was Chaucer... Chaucer revels in
morning scenery.
[Compare with this the text as printed in the Reflector, 1812, above, and in the
second edition, 1815, below.]
1814. Manning, Owen, and Bray, William. The History and Antiquities
of the County of Surrey. ... Begun by the late Rev. Owen
Manning... enlarged and continued to the year 1814, by
William Bray of Shire, 3 vols., 1804-14, vol. iii, p. 551, Southwark.
This being the great thoroughfare for all persons passing to
London from Kent, Surrey, and Sussex, has been always noted
for a number of inns to accommodate travellers. That men¬
tioned by Chaucer, as the place from which he set out with
the pilgrims whose stories he relates in his Canterbury Tales,
has had so much said of it by different authors, that it is
unnecessary to say more here, than that the sign was then the
Tabard; that is, a military or herald’s coat without sleeves;
but that it was long ago converted into that of a dog, which
by corruption of the original name, has since been known by
the name of a Talbot, and is designated by a spotted dog.
This name it still bears. On the frieze of the beam whereon
the sign hung, till removed on forming the new pavement,
