
1825] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 159
1825. Unknown. Amorum Troile [sic] et Cresseidæ, libri duo priores
Anglo-Latine, per Franc. Kinaston, Oxon., 1635, 4to., [in] The
Retrospective Review, vol. xii., article vi, pp. 106, 110.
[p. 106] Chaucer's Troilus and Creseide was the first example of a
regular serious narrative poem, on a large scale, in the English
language. It may be considered as our oldest epic, to use the
word in its common, though sufficiently vague, acceptation;
and for a long time, with the exception of the Knyghtes' Tale
by the same author, it continued to be the only one. Hence,
it was held in that value which always attaches to the first of
any thing, and which adheres to it even for some time after it
has been superseded by more beautiful and finished specimens
of the same kind. It was reverenced as the earliest work in
which the powers of English, as a cultivated language, were
developed; its author was regarded as the Virgil of his
country; his poem was made the foundation of the fictions of
subsequent writers; and, according to a practice common in
former ages, when, as a contemporary critic expresses it, "the
notion of the perishableness of modern tongues, and of the
necessity of preserving works worthy to last, by embalming
them in the immortal language of Rome," was not yet
exploded, it was thought expedient, upwards of two centuries
after its publication, to translate it into Latin.  ...
[p. 110] [Kynaston’s version more universally intelligible than the
original.] Considering the difficulties of his task, Sir Francis
must be allowed to have acquitted himself with much dexterity;
and he deserves praise for the fidelity with which he adheres
to his original, in spite of the temptations afforded by so
ornamental a language as the Latin.
[For Kynaston, see above, 1635, vol. i, p. 207.]
1825. Unknown. Poetry, [in] The Edinburgh Review, vol. xlii, pp.
48, 49.
[p. 48] Chaucer. . . raised poetry from the dust. He has been
likened to ‘the spring,’ and has been called the ‘morning
star’ of English poetry. He was so; or rather, he was a sun
whom no star preceded,–who rose above our literary horizon,
dissipating the wandering lights and sullen vapours which
hung about it; and who, by a power independent of accident
or the time, threw out a dazzling splendour, which showed
at once his own lustre, and the wastes by which he was
surrounded.
