
1819] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Campbell.] 113
Chaucer supposes himself to be snatched up to heaven by a
large eagle, who addresses him in the name of St. James and
the Virgin Mary, and, in order to quiet the poet's fears of
being carried up to Jupiter, like another Ganymede, or turned
into a star like Orion, tells him, that Jove wishes him to
sing of other subjects than love and "blind Cupido," and
has therefore ordered, that Dan Chaucer should be brought
to behold the House of Fame. In Pope, the philosophy of
[p. 19] fame comes with much more propriety from the poet himself,
than from the beak of a talkative eagle.
It was not until his green old age that Chaucer put forth,
in the Canterbury Tales, the full variety of his genius, and
the pathos and romance, as well as the playfulness of fiction.
In the serious part of those tales he is, in general, more deeply
indebted to preceding materials, than in the comic stories,
which he raised upon slight hints to the air and spirit of
originals.  ...
Chaucer's design... though it is left unfinished, has
definite boundaries, and incidents to keep alive our curiosity,
independent of the tales themselves. At the same time, while
the action of the poem is an event too simple to divert the
attention altogether from the pilgrims' stories, the pilgrimage
itself is an occasion sufficiently important to draw together
almost all the varieties of existing society, from the knight to
the artisan, who, agreeably to the old simple manners, assemble
in the same room of the hostellerie. The enumeration of those
[p. 20] characters in the Prologue forms a scene, full, without con¬
fusion; and the object of their journey gives a fortuitous air
to the grouping of individuals, who collectively represent
the age and state of society in which they live.
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. 21] Chaucer's forte is description; much of his moral reflection
is superfluous; none of his characteristic painting. His men
and women are not mere ladies and gentlemen, like those
who furnish apologies for Boccaccio's stories. They rise before
us minutely traced, profusely varied, and strongly discrimi¬
nated. Their features and casual manners seem to have an
amusing congruity with their moral characters. He notices
minute circumstances as if by chance; but every touch has
its effect to our conception so distinctly, that we seem to live
and travel with his personages throughout the journey.
CHAUCER CRITICISM.— II.
