
66 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1814
1814. Southey, Robert. Notes for a series of Inscriptions in honour of
English Poets, [printed in] Preface, by Herbert Hill, to Southey's
Oliver Newman, 1845, pp. x-xi.
Tuesday, 6th Sept. 1814. Inscriptions for the Poetical
Ground of these Kingdoms; i. e. a tribute of respect to all
those poets who deserve it. This, I think, would be a worthy
task.
Chaucer–at Woodstock? Blenheim will become an empty
name, and that palace a pile of ruins, while he remains.
1814. [Southey, Robert ?] Review of Chalmers' English Poets, [in] The
Quarterly Review, July 1814, vol. xi, pp. 482-4; Oct., vol. xii,
pp. 61, 64, 65, 67, 69, 73, 82-4.
[The passage on Chaucer's rejection of the ornate style at the end of the following
extract echoes Southey's words in his Specimens, q.v. above, 1807, closely enough to
warrant the provisional attribution of this review to him.]
[vol xi,
p. 482]
Chaucer himself was a star of the first magnitude: no
man ever did so much with a language in so rude a state, and
only Shakespeare has surpassed him in his intuitive know¬
ledge of human character, and the universality of his genius.
Mr. Chalmers indeed, with that comfortable self-satisfaction
which he derives from flourishing in the nineteenth century,
when the world has the advantage of being enlightened by
lectures on poetry, assures us that Chaucer's popularity is
gone by:—it may be so with those ladies and gentlemen who
conceive poetry to be 'the art of pleasing,' and believe that
nothing which requires thought can possibly give pleasure.
Chaucer has not written for critics and readers of this nature:
... the rank which the father of English poetry holds in
literature has not been assigned by caprice, or fashion, or
superstition. He whom Spenser called his master, and
whom Milton referred to as to his great and immortal prede¬
cessor, is justly placed with them in the first class of poets,
and his fame, like theirs, is for ever. It is a reproach to our
literature that the Canterbury Tales should be the only portion
of his works which have been edited with any degree of care
or ability.
[vol. xii,
p. 64]
He [the author of The Cid] built with rubbish and
unhewn stones; Dante and Petrarca with marble. Chaucer's
materials more resembled those of the Spaniard than of the
Italian poets. This has been in some degree unfortunate for
himself, inasmuch as the progressive improvement of our
