
38 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1808.
1808 L., G. W. Chaucer's Tomb, [in] The Gentleman's Magazine,
Nov. 1808, vol. Ixxviii, p. 974.
Poet Chaucer, very few know the spot where he was interred;
From the mutilated state of that [the tomb] of our first
indeed the inscription is almost defaced, and the Monument
itself has suffered much through neglect. It is the only one
hereabouts which accords with the building in which it is
placed; yet, as if that were a defect, it has been made the
supporter of another, which (not to say anything of the
striking discordance) absolutely appears as if it had casually
perched on it! Notwithstanding these disadvantages, many
may be pleased by having this Monument pointed out to them.
On entering the aile [sic] it is the fourth on the right hand
from the door, and is between those of Cowley and Phillips.
The slab appears to be of Petworth marble; and the canopy
over it, having a rich pendent roof, is supported by pillars,
the sculpture on which forms a kind of lozenge or chequer¬
work. The Latin inscription and other particulars, may be
found by referring to Weever, who closes his survey of the
tombs in the Abbey with an account of this [q.v. above, 1631,
vol i, p. 204].
1808. Lamb, Charles. Specimens of English Dramatic Poets. Footnote
to Middleton's Women Beware Women. (The Works of Charles
and Mary Lamb, ed. E. V. Lucas, 1903-5, 7 vols., vol. iv, p. 129.)
This is one of the scenes which has the air of being an
immediate transcript from life. Livia the “good neighbour"
is as real a creature as one of Chaucer's characters. She is
such another jolly Housewife as the Wife of Bath.
1808. Pratt, Samuel Jackson. The Cabinet of Poetry, containing the
best entire pieces to be found in the works of the British Poets.
Introductory Essay on Poetry, 6 vols., vol. i, pp. xl, li, Ixxi.
[The pieces include nothing from Chaucer, but “Dryden's
Character of a Good Parson" is given.]
[p. xI]
This charm of individuality was in some of their poems
eminently possessed by Chaucer, and other of our elder
bards.
[p. lxxi] The passion for allegory, so long the characteristic of the
Italian school, was by Chaucer rendered as prevalent in
England as it had previously been on the continent.
