
104 [Hazlitt] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1818
[p. 33] Wife of Bath's Prologue (which Pope has very admirably
modernised) is, perhaps, unequalled as a comic story. The
Cock and the Fox is also excellent for lively strokes of
character and satire. January and May is not so good as
some of the others. Chaucer's versification, considering the
time at which he wrote, and that versification is a thing in a
great degree mechanical, is not one of his least merits. It
has considerable strength and harmony, and its apparent
deficiency in the latter respect arises chiefly from the altera¬
tions which have since taken place in the pronunciation or
mode of accenting the words of the language. The best
general rule for reading him is to pronounce the final e, as in
reading Italian.
It was observed in the last Lecture that painting describes
what the object is in itself, poetry what it implies or suggests.
Chaucer's poetry is not, in general, the best confirmation of
the truth of this distinction, for his poetry is more picturesque
and historical than almost any other. But there is one
instance in point.  ... It is the story of the three thieves who
go in search of Death to kill him, and who meeting with him,
are entangled in their fate by his words, without knowing him.
[p. 34] reality is in the mind’s eye.  ... Death is a mighty abstraction,
... The moral impression of Death is essentially visionary; its
like Night, or Space, or Time. He is an ugly customer, who
will not be invited to supper, or to sit for his picture. He
is with us and about us, but we do not see him.  ... Chaucer
knew this. He makes three riotous companions go in search
of Death to kill him, they meet with an old man whom they
reproach with his age, and ask why he does not die, to which
he answers thus:
Ne Deth, alas! ne will not han my lif
[and eleven following lines, Pardoner's Tale, ll. 399-410].
They then ask the old man where they shall find out
Death to kill him, and he sends them on an errand which
ends in the death of all three. We hear no more of him, but
it is Death that they have encountered!
 . . . . . . . . . .
[p. 46] The four greatest names in English poetry are almost the
four first we come to–Chaucer, Spenser, Shakespeare, and
Milton. There are no others that can really be put in com¬
