
18 [Scott] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1804
betwixt Scrope and Grosvenor*; but the manner in which it
is narrated, is a good illustration of the strained inferences
concerning Chaucer’s temper and disposition, deduced by his
biographer from the most common and trivial occurrences.
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. 68] Some particular passages of the life, are less fancifully and
more correctly delineated. Mr. Godwin combats, and in our
opinion successfully, the opinion of those who deny the
honourable claim of Thomas Chaucer, to call the poet father:
and he has vindicated the relation, which the Dreme of
Chaucer unquestionably bears to the History of John of
Gaunt.
The critical dissertations upon Troilus and Creside, and
Chaucer's other poems, have considerable merit. They are
the production of a man who has read poetry with taste and
feeling; and we wish sincerely, that instead of the strange
[p. 69]  farrago which he calls the life of Chaucer, he had given us a
correct edition of the miscellaneous poetry of the author, upon
the same plan with Mr. Tyrwhitt's admirable Canterbury
Tales.
. . . . . . . . . .
We were much surprised to find, that the Canterbury Tales,
[p 70] the most important, as well as the most exquisite, of Chaucer's
productions, have attracted so little of Mr. Godwin's attention.
He might have displayed, in commenting upon poems as varied
in subject as in beauty, his whole knowledge of the manners
of the middle ages, were it ten times more extensive. But
Mr. Godwin, beginning probably to write before he had con¬
sidered either the nature of his subject, or the probable length
of his work, had exhausted both his limits and materials ere
he came to the topic upon which he ought principally to have
dwelt. The characters, therefore, of the several pilgrims, so
exquisitely described, that each individual passes before the
eyes of the reader, and so admirably contrasted with each
other; their conversation and manners, the gallantry of the
Knight and Squire, the affected sentimentality of the Abbess,
the humour of mine Host, and the Wife of Bath; the pride
of the Monk, the humility of the Parson, the learning and
* We hold this to be the only circumstance of importance, which
Mr. Godwin’s researches have brought to light; and so far our thanks
are due to him.
