
1809] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 47
[p. 167] by Mr. Godwin; but there still remains the greater portion of
his works untouched by any skilful editor; for neither Speght
nor Urry can be deemed at all competent to the task which
[p. 168] they undertook. By the indefatigable industry of our literary
antiquaries, much light has lately been thrown upon the state
of our language anterior to the age of Chaucer; its mutations
have been traced, its history ascertained, its poetry commented
upon, and of course the diction and versification of Chaucer,
their merits and defects, better understood and defined. The
application of these resources to a new edition of the entire
works of the venerable bard, would, there is little doubt, be
well received by the public.
1809. Godwin, William. Essay on Sepulchres: or, a Proposal for
Erecting some Memorial of the Illustrious Dead in all Ages on the
Spot where their Remains have been Interred, p. 82.
I pity the being of slender comprehension, who lives only
with George the Third, and Alexander of Russia, and Wieland,
and Schiller, and Kant, and Jeremy Bentham, and John
Horne Tooke, when if the grosser film were removed from his
eyes, he might live and sensibly mingle with Socrates, and
Plato, and the Decii, and the Catos, with Chaucer, and Milton,
and Thomas Aquinas, and Thomas à Becket, and all the stars
that gild our mortal sphere.
1809. Hamper, William. Letter, [in] The Gentleman's Magazine, June
1809, vol. Ixxix, p. 512.
[On Tyrwhitt's Chaucer, with suggestions as to obscure
passages.]
1809. Scott, Sir Walter. Reliques of Burns... collected and published
by R. H. Cromek, [in] The Quarterly Review, vol. i, pp. 35-6.
(Miscellaneous Prose Works of Sir Walter Scott, Edinburgh,
1834-71, 30 vols. vol. xvii, p. 266.)
We know not whether the family of the poet will derive
any advantage from this publication of his remains. If so, it
is the best apology for their being given to the world; if not,
we have no doubt the editor, as he is an admirer of Chaucer,
has read of a certain pardoner, who
—" with his relics when that he fond
A poor persone dwelling up on lond,
Upon a day he gat him more moneie
Than that the persone got in monethes tweie."
