
126 Five Hundred Years of  [A.D. 1820
and attributed to him, is a translation, under this title, of a
poem of the celebrated Alain Chartier, secretary to Charles
the Sixth and Seventh. It was the title which suggested to
a friend the verses at the end of our present number [Keats’s
‘Belle Dame sans Mercy,’ signed ‘Caviare’]...
[p. 247] We know not in what year Chartier was born, but he must
have lived to a good age and written the poem in his
youth if Chaucer translated it; for he died in 1449, and
Chaucer, an old man, in 1400. The beginning, however, as
well as the goodness of the version, looks as if our country¬
man had done it, for he speaks of the translation having been
enjoined him by way of penance. And the Legend of Good
Women was the result of a similar injunction in consequence
of his having written some stories not so much to the credit
of the sex! He who, as he represents, had written infinite
things in their praise! But the Court-ladies, it seems, did not
relish the story of Troilus and Cressida. The exordium,
which the translator has added, is quite in our poet's manner.
He says that he rose one day, not well awaked; and thinking
how he should best enter on his task, he took one of his
morning walks,
Till I came to a lusty green vally
[and four following lines].
1820. [Hunt, James Henry Leigh ?] Death and the Drunkards [the
Pardoneres Tale] modernized from Chaucer, [in] Ollier's Literary
Miscellany, No. 1 [and last], pp. 48-53.
[p. 53] [Appended is the following note:] The above is a prose
modernisation of one of the Canterbury Tales of Chaucer. The
reader, who has been deterred from the pages of this great
poet, in consequence of the vulgar opinion that they are insur¬
mountably obsolete and difficult, will perhaps be struck with
the grand and simple power shown here; and when he learns
that the words are Chaucer's own, he may get rid of his
timidity and go at once to the original works where he will
be richly rewarded for a little preliminary trouble. This is
the only aim of the above; for every alteration of Chaucer is
an injury.
[This is attributed here to Leigh Hunt on account of its similarity to parts of the
passage from his Mayday, of the same year; some of which is quoted above.]
