
74 [Nott] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1815
But the chief improvement introduced by Chaucer into
our versification was that of dropping altogether the use of
the Alexandrine line, and substituting the line of ten
syllables in its stead.  ...
But though Chaucer reduced our verse to ten syllables, he
suffered it to retain in other respects the properties of the
old Alexandrine verse. Like that it was divided by the old
cæsura into hemistichs; had the pause at the end, and was
recited rhythmically. It was still what Lydgate called "the
verse of Cadence." It is true that many of Chaucer's lines
[p.clix] have the appearance of being pure Iambic Decasyllables.
This however was the effect of accident. For accent and quan¬
tity, which are not of necessity the same, would sometimes
coincide, and when they did, a pure Iambic Decasyllable was
unavoidably the result. It was the frequent occurrence of
these fortuitous Iambic lines that led Mr. Tyrwhitt, and before
him Mr. Urry, and the learned Mr. Morell, to believe that
Chaucer's system of versification was altogether metrical. But
an impartial consideration of the subject, and a reference to
good MSS. must I think lead us to conclude that Chaucer had
not a metrical system of numbers in contemplation; but that,
on the contrary, he designed his verses to be read, like those of
all his contemporaries, with a cæsura and rhythmical cadence.
Should it be asked why so many Iambic lines are to be
found in Chaucer, the answer is obvious. Our language had
become more compressed. Most of the words in common use
had dropped their final syllables, and monosyllables were
multiplied. This could not but produce a corresponding effect
on our versification, and lines of ten syllables would insensibly
be written instead of lines of twelve or fourteen....
[Here follow some instances from Manning's, or Robert of
Brunne’s, continuation of Langtoft’s Chronicle, of the mixture
of the Alexandrine with verses of ten syllables.]
. . . . . . . . ..
[p.clx] Manning's use of the Decasyllabic verse, therefore, was
partial and accidental. The case was otherwise with Chaucer.
He used it uniformly, and upon system. This admits of
no doubt. I am not aware that a single instance of the
Alexandrine verse occurs in all Chaucer's works; for I fully
agree with Mr. Tyrwhitt that the Tale of Gamelyn was not
written by Chaucer.
