
1803] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 11
to say, and bottling them up till I came... when lo! this
deadly blight intervened.
I certainly ought to make great allowances for your mis¬
understanding me. You... cannot conceive of the desultory
and uncertain way in which I (an author by fits) sometimes
cannot put the thoughts of a common letter into sane prose.
[Lamb enlarges upon his utter inability to write at times.] I
wrote such stuff about Chaucer, and got into such digressions,
quite irreducible into 1⅕ column of a paper, that I was perfectly
ashamed to show it you. However, it is become a serious
matter that I should convince you I neither slunk from the
task through a wilful deserting neglect, or through any (most
imaginary on your part) distaste of Chaucer; and I will try
my hand again, I hope with better luck. My health is bad
and my time taken up, but all I can spare between this and
Sunday shall be employed for you, since you desire it: and
if I bring you a crude, wretched paper on Sunday, you
must burn it, and forgive me; if it proves anything better
than I predict, may it be a peace-offering of sweet incense
between us.
C. Lamb.
[Lamb's review of Godwin's Life of Chaucer has not been identified. Perhaps it
was never completed, or perhaps Godwin burnt it when they met on the Sunday.
See Letter 202, and notes, Lucas's edn., vol. i, p. 463, vol. iii, p. 473, and vol. vi,
pp. 450, 451-2, where Lamb tells Wordsworth that his review of the Excursion was
the first review he ever wrote.]
1803. Leyden, John. Scenes of Infancy. See below, App. A.
1803. Malcolm, James Peller. Londinium Redivivum, 4 vols., 1802-7,
vol. ii, 1803, pp. 11, 329-30.
p. 330) [A note (from Stowe) that Richard Chaucer was usually
considered father to the poet, and citation of Granger (q.v.
above, 1769, vol. i, pp. 431-2) that his verse, musical to his con¬
temporaries, was unsuited to the ears of the present age. Then
follows a notice of the portrait in Hoccleve.]
1803. Southey, Robert. Letter to C. W. W. Wynn, dated June 9,
1803. (Life and Correspondence of Robert Southey, 1850, vol. ii,
P 212.)
[Southey says he has just been reading Scott's Border
Ballads.] Scott, it seems, adopts the same system of metre
with me, and varies his time in the same stanza from iambic
to anapæstic ad libitum. In spite of all the trouble that
has been taken to torture Chaucer into heroic metre, I have
