
1815] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Nott] 79
[p. ccl] The same confusion arising from an absurd use of particular
instead of general ideas and sentiments in points of feeling,
reigns throughout the whole of the Troilus and Cressida.
Indeed were the names of the personages altered, that poem
would not only become a tale of chivalry, but would gain
beauty as well as propriety by the change.
. . . . . . . . .
[p. cclvi] How much inferior, on this account [i. e. incongruity and
confusion of ideas] is Palamon and Arcite, one of Chaucer's
most finished works, to his Squire's Tale, which even in
its imperfect state remains the most vigorous effort of his
fancy. The reason of the inferiority is this. In the Squire's
Tale every thing is of a piece; the subject, the figures, the
ideas, the machinery, are all purely Gothic, with a certain
mixture of eastern imagery which gave, at the time of the
Crusades, a peculiar colouring to our northern romances...
But in the Knight's Tale we are sensible at every page that
the principal rules of good taste are violated; we feel the
absurdity of combining manners of periods so remote from
each other as the time of Theseus, and the reign of Edward
the Third; and even when we are most pleased we tremble
lest some strange incongruity should arise, to destroy the
effect of all that has preceeded.
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. ccxix] Sect. XX. Of the authors whom Surrey studied; of
Chaucer, Dante...
As for Chaucer his name is in every one's mouth; and is
always mentioned with praise. Nor could it well be otherwise.
We could not but speak with respect of the author whom
Spencer had declared to have been his poetic father, whom so
many subsequent writers had called 'the Well-head of English
undefiled,' and whom Dryden had commended in terms of filial
reverence. Still Chaucer is little read, and his merits are
imperfectly understood. He was a poet of as large and com¬
prehensive a mind as almost any whom this, or any other
country can boast. He was a great and an universal scholar.
This praise cannot be denied to him who was master of all the
learning of his times. His memory was stored with images
collected from all the sources of information then open to
enquiry... Had the Squire's Tale been finished... I am
persuaded that Chaucer would have left us the noblest
