
1809] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 45
age. Yet he is a Poor Parson of a town. Read Chaucer's
description of the Good Parson, and bow the head and the
knee to him, who, in every age sends us such a burning and a
shining light.  ...
[p. 19] Chaucer's characters live age after age. Every age is a
Canterbury Pilgrimage; we all pass on, each sustaining one or
[p.20] other of these characters; nor can a child be born, who is not
one of these characters of Chaucer. The Doctor of Physic is
described as the first of his profession; perfect, learned, com¬
pletely Master and Doctor in his art. Thus the reader will
observe, that Chaucer makes every one of his characters
perfect in his kind, every one is an Antique Statue; the
image of a class, and not of an imperfect individual.
[p. 20] ... The Franklin is one who keeps open table, who is the
genius of eating and drinking, the Bacchus; as the Doctor of
Physic is the Esculapius, the Host is the Silenus, the Squire
is the Apollo, the Miller is the Hercules, &c. Chaucer's
characters are a description of the eternal Principles that exist
in all ages. The Franklin is voluptuousness itself most nobly
pourtrayed....
[p.21] The Plowman is simplicity itself, with wisdom and strength
for its stamina. Chaucer has divided the ancient character of
Hercules between his Miller and his Plowman. Benevolence
is the Plowman's great characteristic, he is thin with excessive
labour, and not with old age, as some have supposed.  ...
Visions of these eternal principles or characters of human
[p. 22] life appear to poets, in all ages.  ... The Plowman of Chaucer
is Hercules in his supreme eternal state, divested of his
spectrous shadow; which is the Miller, a terrible fellow, such
as exists in all times and places, for the trial of men.   ...
[p. 24] The characters of Women Chaucer has divided into two
classes, the Lady Prioress and the Wife of Bath. Are not
these leaders of the ages of men? The lady prioress, in
some ages, predominates; and in some the wife of Bath, in
whose character Chaucer has been equally minute and exact;
because she is also a scourge and a blight. I shall say no
more of her, nor expose what Chaucer has left hidden; let
the young reader study what he has said of her : it is useful
as a scarecrow. There are of such characters born too many
for the peace of the world.
I come at length to the Clerk of Oxenford. This character
