
1809] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 43
Of Chaucer's characters, as described in his Canterbury
Tales, some of the names or titles are altered by time, but the
characters themselves for ever remain unaltered, and conse¬
quently they are the physiognomies or lineaments of universal
human life, beyond which Nature never steps. Names alter,
things never alter. I have known multitudes of those who
would have been monks in the age of monkery, who in this
deistical age are deists. As Newton numbered the stars, and
as Linneus [sic] numbered the plants, so Chaucer numbered
the classes of men. ...
[p. 11] The Knight and Squire with the Squire's Yeoman lead the
procession, as Chaucer has also placed them first in his prologue.
The Knight is a true Hero, a good, great, and wise man; his
whole-length portrait on horseback, as written by Chaucer,
cannot be surpassed. He has spent his life in the field; has
ever been a conqueror, and is that species of character which in
every age stands as the guardian of man against the oppressor.
His son is like him with the germ of perhaps greater perfection
still, as he blends literature and the arts with his warlike
studies.  ... The Squire's Yeoman is also a great character, a
man perfectly knowing in his profession:
"And in his hand he bare a mighty bow."
Chaucer describes here a mighty man; one who in war is
the worthy attendant on noble heroes.
[p. 12] The Prioress follows these with her female chaplain.  ...
This Lady is described also as of the first rank; rich and
honoured. She has certain peculiarities and little delicate
affectations, not unbecoming in her, being accompanied with
what is truly grand and really polite; her person and face,
Chaucer has described with minuteness; it is very elegant,
and was the beauty of our ancestors, till after Elizabeth's
time, when voluptuousness and folly began to be accounted
[p.13] beautiful.  ... The Monk is described by Chaucer, as a man
of the first rank in society, noble, rich, and expensively
attended: he is a leader of the age, with certain humorous
accompaniments in his character, that do not degrade, but
render him an object of dignified mirth, but also with
accompaniments not so respectable.
The Friar is a character also of a mixed kind.
"A friar there was, a wanton and a merry;"
