
40 [Scott] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1808.
Thus, the quarrel between Arcite and Palamon is wrought up
with greater energy by Dryden than Chaucer, particularly by
the addition of the following lines, describing the enmity of
the captives against each other:
Now friends no more, nor walking hand in hand,
But when they met, they made a surly stand
And glared like angry lions as they pass'd,
And wish'd that every look might be their last.
But the modern must yield the palm, despite the beauty of
his versification, to the description of Emily by Chaucer; and
may be justly accused of loading the dying speech of Arcite
with conceits for which his original gave him no authority.
 . . . . . . . . . .
[p. 501] [The French element in Chaucer's language.]
[p. 502] Upon the whole, in introducing these romances of Boccacio
and Chaucer to modern readers, Dryden has necessarily de¬
prived them of some of the charms which they possess for
those who have perused them in their original state.  ...
To antiquaries Dryden has sufficiently justified himself, by
declaring his version made for the sake of modern readers,
who understand sense and poetry as well as the old Saxon
admirers of Chaucer, when that poetry and sense are put into
words which they can understand. Let us also grant him that
for the beauties which are lost, he has substituted many which
the original did not afford; that, in passages of gorgeous
description, he has added even to the chivalrous splendour
[p. 503] of Chaucer, and has graced with poetical ornament the sim¬
plicity of Boccacio; that, if he has failed in tenderness, he is
never deficient in majesty.
[Vol. xi,   The “Knight's Tale," whether Chaucer's or Dryden's
 . . . . . . . . . .
p. 245]
version, is one of the finest pieces of composition in our
language.   ... The work of Chaucer cannot, however, properly
be termed a translation; on the contrary, the tale has acquired
its most beautiful passages under the hand of the English
bard. He abridged the prolix, and enlarged the poetical,
parts of the work; compressed the whole into one concise
and interesting tale; and left us an example of a beautiful
heroic poem.
. . . . . . . . . .
