
8 [Godwin] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1803
we combine our examination of it, with a recollection of the times
and circumstances in which it was produced. [The “languid
[p. 302] and perishing” state of the English tongue in Chaucer's
time.]... [Chaucer] surprised his countrymen with a poem,
eminently idiomatic, clear and perspicuous in its style, as well
[p. 303] as rich and harmonious in its versification.... The loves of
Troilus and Creseide scarcely retain any traces of the pre¬
posterous and rude manners of the age in which they were
delineated.
This poem therefore, as might have been expected, long
fixed upon itself the admiration of the English nation....
[It] was probably, more than any of his other works, the basis
of his fame, and the foundation of his fortune.¹
[vol. ii,
p. 572]
This Canterbury Tales is [sic] the great basis of the fame of
Chaucer, and indolent men have generally expressed themselves
with contempt of the rest of his works as unworthy of atten¬
tion.... He indeed who wishes to become personally ac¬
quainted with Chaucer, must of necessity have recourse to his
minor pieces. The Canterbury Tales are too full of business,
variety, character and action, to permit the writer in any great
degree to show himself.... The Troilus and Creseide in
particular, that poem of which Sir Philip Sidney speaks
with so much delight, though deficient in action, cannot be
[p. 573] too much admired for the suavity and gentleness of nature
which it displays.... All the milder and more delicate
feelings of the soul are displayed... and displayed in a
manner which none but a poet of the purest and sweetest
dispositions, and at the same time of the greatest discrimina¬
tion, could have attained.
The Canterbury Tales is certainly one of the most extra¬
ordinary monuments of human genius...
What infinite variety of character is presented to us in
the Prologue to the Canterbury Tales! It is a copious and
extensive review of the private life of the fourteenth century
in England.
This has usually, and perhaps justly, been thought the most
conspicuous excellence of Chaucer; his power of humour, of
delineating characters, and of giving vivacity and richness to
comic incidents.
. . . . . . .
[¹ For Charles Lamb's remarks upon this criticism, see below, 1803.]
