
76 [Nott] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1815
verses seems to me wholly inconsistent with the notion of a
Again; the incessant recurrence of defective and redundant
regular system of metrical versification, but not so with
rhythmical versification....
. . . . . . . . . .
Another, and I conceive a conclusive reason for believing
Chaucer’s verses to have been rhythmical verses, or verses of
cadence, may be drawn from the Manuscripts themselves in
which his poems are preserved. [Nott here goes on to
show that in all the MSS. either the cæsura, or the pause at
the end of the line is marked, and that sometimes both are
carefully marked, and that all the MSS. agree in fixing the
cæsura in every line, with hardly any variation, at the same
place; pointing to the fact that Chaucer not only meant his
verses to be rhythmical, but did all he could to settle what
their rhythm should be.]
. . . . . . . . . .
Sect. VIII. Of the nature and importance of Poetic Orna¬
ment, and of the defects of our early English Poets in Point
of Poetic Diction...
p. clxxxviii] Chaucer did much towards refining our poetic diction,
but he left it indefinite: and therefore open to subsequent
innovation and experiment. Indeed he was not consistent in
the use of one uniform style. In his Canterbury Tales what
he seems to have particularly aimed at was simplicity of con¬
struction and a not over-curious selection of words. By these
means he obtained a sort of natural dignity, and simple
elegance of style which rose often into sublimity, and enabled
him to present his thoughts in a manner singularly clear and
distinct. In his Troilus and Cressida, which is evidently
his most laboured composition, he aimed at something like
involution, and affected a greater nicety of terms.
[p. cxcii] Another defect in Chaucer, and in all our early poets, was
. . . . . . . . . .
the little attention paid by them to their system of Rhyming.
[p. cxciii] ... We find him [Chaucer] constantly admitting double
rhymes, which in grave and heroic subjects cannot be allowed,
as they carry with them an air of lightness inconsistent with
the dignity of heroic composition. He rhymed also not only
on feeble words, but on such as in themselves were mean and
trivial. The following rhymes occur in the Knights' Tales,
