
16 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1804
1804. Robinson, Thomas. Letter to Henry Crabb Robinson, [dated]
May 6th, 1804. (Crabb Robinson Letters [unpublished], in Dr.
Williams’ Library, Gordon Square, W.C.)
by reading the first vol. of Godwin's "Life of Chaucer."
Since I wrote to you I have been considerably interested
[Here follows a detailed description of that work, not flatter¬
ing to Godwin, concluding:] I have received many new ideas
and been highly delighted by some beautiful passages which
are pointed out in works of the poet, and which I was capable
of relishing in spite of the obsoleteness of the language.
1804. Scott, Sir Walter. Review of Ellis's Specimens of the Early
English Poets, [in] The Edinburgh Review, vol. iv, p. 156. (Mis¬
cellaneous Prose Works of Sir Walter Scott, Edinburgh, 1834-71,
30 vols., vol. xvii., pp. 6, 9, 11.)
[p. 9] The epoch from which English may be considered as a
classical language, may be fixed in the reign of Edward III,
the age of Gower and of Chaucer, in which it was no longer
confined to what the latter has called “the drafty riming" of
the wandering minstrel.
1804. Scott, Sir Walter. Review of the Works of Thomas Chatterton,
[in] The Edinburgh Review, April, 1804, vol. iv, pp. 228-9.
(Miscellaneous Prose Works of Sir Walter Scott, 30 vols., Edin¬
burgh, 1834-71, vol. xvii, pp. 237-8.)
[p. 237]  An instance of a curious mistake committed by Chatterton
occurs in these excerpts from the Pseudo-Rowley prose writ¬
ings. In a MS. in Chatterton's handwriting, in the Museum,
there occur several excerpts from Chaucer, apparently culled
to bolster out some intended imitations. Among others we
[p. 238] find the two lines respecting the mormal on the leg of the
pilgrims' cook–
“But great harm was yt, as it thought me,
That on his skinne a mormall had he."
Skinne is here miscopied for shin. This mistake, and
another more whimsical, we can trace into the ‘Rolle of
Seyncte Bartholæmeweis Priorie,’ printed in Barret's History
of Bristol, to whom it was communicated by Chatterton.
Among a list of medical books... we find... Johan
Stowe of the cure of mormalles and the waterie leprosie: the
rolle of the blacke mainger. In a note on these two last
