
62 [Dunlop] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1814
it will be found that the time chosen by Boccaccio is infinitely
preferable to that adopted by the English poet. The pilgrims
of the latter relate their stories on a journey, though they are
on horseback, and are twenty-nine in number; and it was
intended, had the author completed his plan, that this rabble
should have told the remainder of their tales in an abominable
tavern at Canterbury. On the other hand, the Florentine
assembly discourse in tranquillity and retirement... But
then the frame of Chaucer afforded a much greater oppor¬
tunity of displaying a variety of striling and dramatic
characters, and thence of introducing characteristic tales.
His assemblage is mixed and fortuitous, and his travellers
are distinguished from each other both in person and character.
Even his serious pilgrims are marked by their several sorts
[p. 237] of gravity, and the ribaldry of his low characters is different.
'I see', says Dryden, 'every one of the pilgrims in the
Canterbury Tales as distinctly as if I had supped with them.'
All the company in the Decameron, on the other hand, are
fine ladies and gentlemen of Florence, who retire to enjoy
the sweets of select society, and who would scarcely have
tolerated the intrusion of such figures as the Miller or the
Sompnour.
[pp.
300-1] Chaucer's Pardoner, and quotation of Prol. Il. 701-4.]
[Boccaccio's Fra Cipolla (Decam. vi, 10) compared with
The incidents in the novel of Boccaccio [Decam. vii, 9]
concerning the pear-tree... have... some resemblance to
the Merchant's Tale in Chaucer, and by consequence to Pope's
January and May.
[p. 342] This story of Boccaccio [Decam. x, 6] is the origin of the
Frankelein's Tale of Chaucer, in which the circumstances are
precisely the same as in the Decameron, except that the
impossible thing required of the lady is, that her lover should
remove the rocks from the coast of Britany [sic]: a similar
tale, however, according to Tyrwhitt, occurs in an old Breton
lay, from which he conceives the incidents may have come
immediately to the English poet...
[p. 343] The tale of Boccaccio is supposed by the editor of Beaumont
and Fletcher to be also the origin of the Triumph of
Honour... but it is more probable that these dramatists
[p. 344] took their plot from the Frankelein's Tale in Chaucer, as
the impossible thing required in the Triumph of Honour, by
