
1814] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 67
tongue has at length rendered him obsolete, (or rather caused
him to be thought so,) and thus deprived him of that exten¬
sive and pre-eminent popularity which he long and deservedly
enjoyed. ...
[p. 65]
Chaucer drew much from the French and Italian poets,
but more from observation and the stores of his own wealthy
and prolific mind. Strong English sense, and strong English
humour characterize his original works. He caught with a
painter's hand the manners and features of the age; he beheld
the objects of external nature with a poet’s eye, and he pene¬
trated with a poet's intuition into the recesses of the human
heart. Dante holds a higher place in literature because he
wrought with materials which were capable of displaying and
preserving his exquisite skill. Dante may be classed above all
other poets for strength and severity of style: Nothing can be
worse than the plan of the Divina Commedia; the matter is
sometimes puerile, sometimes shocking, frequently dull, but
the style is uniformly perfect. Here Chaucer falls short of
him, but only here, where, from the state of the English
language, it was impossible that he should prove his equal:
in extent and variety of power he is greatly his superior.
[During the 15th century] there could be little encourage¬
ment for poetry, and what was produced chiefly consisted
either of dull translations, or vapid imitations of Chaucer.
The 'style ornate' had been introduced, and was sanctioned
by Chaucer's name: of the poems in that style which are
printed as his, many are of questionable authority; few traces
of it are to be found in his greater and better works; and it
seems probable that he just tried the experiment, and convinced
himself of its unfitness.
1814. Thurlow, Edward Hovell, Lord. Moonlight, a Poem, with Several
Copies of Verses, p. 21. [There is another edition of this poem,
also of 1814; the title runs differently—'Moonlight, the Doge’s
Daughter, Ariadne,' etc.]
[The author asks his Muse: Where are now the great poets
of Italy?]
Or, if we turn to England in our thought,
Tell me where Chaucer may be found? or where
Sweet Spenser, that from rebels fled to death,
His heart quite broken with the faulty time?...
