
1818] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 97
But surely the beauty does not lie in the last line, though it
is with this that Mr. Hazlitt is chiefly struck.
[Hazlitt answers this criticism in his Letter to William Gifford, 1819; see below.
For Hazlitt's Lectures see below, 1818.]
1818. Hallam, Henry. View of the State of Europe during the Middle
Ages, 2 vols, vol. ii, pp. 607-8. [In the edition of 1819 the
references are vol. iii, pp. 575-7.]
[p. 607] But the principal ornament of our English literature
was Geoffrey Chaucer, who, along with Dante and Petrarch,
fills up the triumvirate of great poets in the middle ages.  ...
I cannot, in my own taste, go completely along with the
eulogies that some have bestowed upon Chaucer, who seems to
me to have wanted grandeur, where he is original, both in
conception and in language. But in vivacity of imagination
and ease of expression, he is above all the poets of the middle
time, and comparable perhaps to the greatest of those who
have followed. He invented, or rather introduced from
France, and employed with facility the regular iambic couplet;
and though it was not to be expected that he should perceive
the capacities latent in that measure, his versification, to
which he accommodated a very licentious and arbitrary
pronunciation, is uniform and harmonious. [Footnote here
referring to Tyrwhitt's essay, and Nott’s disagreement with
it (q.v. above, 1775, vol. i, p. 442, and 1815-16).] It is
chiefly, indeed, as a comic poet, and a minute observer
of manners and circumstances, that Chaucer excels. In
[p. 608] serious and moral poetry he is frequently languid and diffuse;
but he springs, like Antæus from the earth, when his subject
changes to coarse satire or merry narrative. Among his more
elevated compositions, the Knight's Tale is abundantly sufficient
to immortalize Chaucer.  ... The second place may be given to
Troilus and Creseide, a beautiful and interesting poem, though
enfeebled by expansion. But perhaps the most eminent,
or at any rate the most characteristic testimony to his genius
will be found in the Prologue to his Canterbury Tales; a
work entirely and exclusively his own, which can seldom be
said of his poetry, and the vivid delineations of which
perhaps very few writers but Shakspeare could have
equalled.
CHAUCER CRITICISM.—II.
