
1805] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 23
[p. v] I shall acquit myself more to the satisfaction of the critical
world by keeping in mind the language and numbers in which
Dryden has told some of the Canterbury Tales, than by
sedulously imitating the dryness of the original poems: the
expression of Chaucer being, indeed, strong and quaint; but
very inadequate to convey either his ideas or Dryden’s.
1804.   Ω. Review of Godwin's Life of Chaucer, [in] The Literary
Journal, January and February, 1804, vol. iii, coll. 11-19, 64-79.
[p. 15] ... We cannot but be startled at the first sentence of the
preface; “The two names which do greatest honour to the
annals of English Literature, are those of Chaucer and of
Shakspeare." That Chaucer was a wonderful poet when we
consider the times in which he lived, no man will dispute; but
to enthrone him above Milton and all the other splendid
geniuses who have adorned our literature... is an hyperbole
of rather inauspicious aspect at the commencement of a
work.
[p. 69] ... In Chaucer we find some happy expressions, many
striking images and many traits of genuine humour; but to
suppose that these can convey equal pleasure to the reader in
the uncouth and antiquated style in which they are expressed,
as when we find them in the finely-turned versification of the
reign of Queen Anne, is an idea which could be entertained
for a moment, only by the blindest enthusiasm.
[p. 70] Mr. G. must also know that Pope and Dryden will continue
to be read with delight by all their countrymen; while his
" popular book in modern English" will never be able to rescue
Chaucer from the cabinets of the antiquaries. That poet was
indeed admirable in his day; and had he been destined to write
in a later age, his works would still have been read with
delight.
1805-6. Cary, Henry Francis. The Inferno of Dante Alighieri...
with a translation in blank verse, notes... by the Rev. Henry
Francis Cary, 2 vols. Notes, vol. i, pp. 66 [quotation from the
non-Chaucerian Chaucer’s Dream], 251 [Ser Brunetto’s Tesoretto
‘is a curious work, not unlike the writings of Chaucer in style
and numbers’]; vol. ii, pp. 260 [quotation from the Squieres Tale,
for Achilles’ spear], 281 [Genilon, in Nonne Preestes Tale, and
‘Peter of Spaine,’ in Monkes Tale].
[For Cary's complete translation of the Divina Commedia, with these and addi¬
tional Chaucer references in the notes, which are there printed together at the end of
each volume, see below, 1814.]
