
44 [Blake] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1809
[p. 14] quent, amorous, witty, and satyrical; young, handsome and
but in his office he is said to be a "full solemn man :" elo¬
rich; he is a complete rogue; with constitutional gaiety enough
to make him a master of all the pleasures of the world...
It is necessary here to speak of Chaucer's own character,
that I may set certain mistaken critics right in their conception
of the humour and fun that occurs on the journey.
Chaucer is himself the great poetical observer of men, who
in every age is born to record and eternize its acts. This he
does as a master, as a father, and superior, who looks down on
their little follies from the Emperor to the Miller; sometimes
with severity, oftener with joke and sport.
[p. 16] one who studied poetical art.  ... Though a man of luxury,
Accordingly Chaucer has made his Monk a great tragedian,
pride and pleasure, he is a master of art and learning, though
affecting to despise it.  ...
For the Host who follows this group, and holds the center
of the cavalcade, is a first-rate character, and his jokes are no
trifles; they are always, though uttered with audacity, and
equally free with the Lord and the Peasant, they are always
substantially and weightily expressive of knowledge and
experience; Henry Baillie, the keeper of the greatest Inn, of
the greatest City; for such was the Tabarde Inn in Southwark,
near London: our Host was also a leader of the age.  ...
[p. 17] But I have omitted to speak of a very prominent character,
the Pardoner, the Age's Knave, who always commands and
domineers over the high and low vulgar. This man is sent
in every age for a rod and scourge, and for a blight, for a
trial of men, to divide the classes of men, he is in the most
holy sanctuary, and he is suffered by Providence for wise ends,
and has also his great use, and his grand leading destiny.
His companion the Sompnour, is also a Devil of the first
magnitude, grand, terrific, rich and honoured in the rank of
[p. 18] which he holds the destiny. The uses to society are perhaps
equal of the Devil and of the Angel; their sublimity, who can
dispute...
The principal figure in the next groupe is the Good Parson;
an Apostle, a real Messenger of Heaven, sent in every age for
its light and its warmth. This man is beloved and venerated
by all, and neglected by all: He serves all, and is served by
none; he is, according to Christ's definition, the greatest of his
