
112 [Campbell] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1819
fancy, it is grotesque and meager [sic]; but the lines often
flow with great harmony.
His story of Troilus and Cresseide was the delight of Sir
Philip Sydney; and perhaps, excepting the Canterbury Tales,
was, down to the time of Queen Elizabeth, the most popular
poem in the English language. It is a story of vast length
and almost desolate simplicity, and abounds in all those
glorious anachronisms which were then, and so long after, per¬
mitted to romantic poetry: such as making the son of King
Priam read the Thebais of Statius, and the gentlemen of Troy
converse about the devil, justs and tournaments, bishops,
parliaments, and scholastic divinity.
The languor of the story is, however, relieved by many
touches of pathetic beauty. The confession of Cresseide in
the scene of felicity, when the poet compares her to the "new
abashed nightingale, that stinteth first ere she beginneth sing,"
is a fine passage, deservedly noticed by Warton. The grief of
Troilus after the departure of Cresseide is strongly portrayed
in Troilus's soliloquy in his bed.
. . . . . . . . . .
[p 17] The sensations of Troilus, on coming to the house of his
faithless Cresseide, when, instead of finding her returned, he
beholds the barred doors and shut windows, giving tokens of
her absence, as well as his precipitate departure from the
distracting scene, are equally well described.
. . . . . . . . . .
The two best of Chaucer's allegories, The Flower and the
Leaf, and The House of Fame, have been fortunately per¬
[p.18] petuated in our language; the former by Dryden, the latter by
Pope. The Flower and the Leaf is an exquisite piece of fairy
fancy.  ... Pope had not so enchanting a subject in The
House of Fame; yet, with deference to Warton, that critic
has done Pope injustice in assimilating his imitations of
Chaucer to the modern ornaments in Westminster Abbey,
which impair the solemn effect of the ancient building. The
many absurd and fantastic particulars in Chaucer's House of
Fame will not suffer us to compare it, as a structure in poetry,
with so noble a pile as Westminster Abbey in architecture.
Much of Chaucer's fantastic matter has been judiciously
omitted by Pope, who at the same time has clothed the best
ideas of the old poem in spirited numbers and expression.
