
1818] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Hazlitt] 105
petition with these. The two last had justice done them by
the voice of common fame. Their names are blazoned in the
very firmament of reputation; while the two first (though
"the fault has been more in their stars than in themselves
that they are underlings") cither never emerged far above
the horizon, or were too soon involved in the obscurity
of time. The three first of these are excluded from Dr.
Johnson's Lives of the Poets (Shakespeare indeed is so from
the dramatic form of his compositions).   ... In comparing
these four writers together, it might be said that Chaucer
excels as the poet of manners, or of real life... Chaucer
most frequently describes things as they are.... As poets,
and as great poets, imagination, that is, the power of feigning
things according to nature, was common to them all; but the
principle, or moving power, to which this faculty was most
subservient in Chaucer, was habit, or inveterate prejudice.
... The characteristic of Chaucer is intensity...
[p. 50] Chaucer's characters are sufficiently distinct from one
another, but they are too little varied in themselves, too much
like identical propositions. They are consistent, but uniform;
we get no idea of them from first to last; they are not
placed in different lights, nor are their subordinate traits
brought out in new situations; they are like portraits or
physiognomical studies, with the distinguishing features
marked with inconceivable truth and precision, but that
preserve the same unaltered air and attitude.  ... Chaucer's
characters are narrative.  ... That is, Chaucer told only as
much of his story as he pleased, as was required for a
particular purpose. He answered for his characters himself.
... In Chaucer we perceive a fixed essence of character...
[p. 52] Nearly all those [dialogues] in Shakespeare, where the
interest is wrought up to its highest pitch, afford example of
this dramatic fluctuation of passion. The interest in Chaucer
is quite different; it is like the course of a river, strong, and
full, and increasing.
[On Dryden and Pope.]
[p. 82] . . . His [Dryden's] alterations from Chaucer and
Boccaccio show a greater knowledge of the taste of his readers
and power of pleasing them, than acquaintance with the
genius of his authors. He ekes out the lameness of the
