
22 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1804-
1804-5. Wharton, Richard. Fables: consisting of Select parts from
Dante, Berni, Chaucer, and Ariosto, imitated in English Heroic
Verse, by Richard Wharton, 2 vols.
Vol. i, pp. 70-99. [The Franklein’s Tale from Chaucer.]
Heroic Poem in six books, founded upon and comprising a free
Vol. ii, pp. i-xvi, 1-199. Fables, containing Cambuscan, an
imitation of Chaucer's fragment on that subject, 1805.
[Wharton's version of the celebrated lines on love may
serve as a specimen of his modernization:]
[vol. i,
p. 73]
Gentles, who hear the tale, learn this from me,
Love cannot bloom beneath authority.
That union best endures where each receives
A little grace, and each a little gives;
For Love, if either strive to rule alone,
Extends his wings and farewell! he is gone.
Love is a thing as any spirit free
Lost by restraint and gained by liberty.
. . . . . . . . . . .
Mr. Pope's imitation,
Spreads his light wings and in a moment flies,
however beautiful in the structure of the verse, is weaker
than the original,
Beateth his wings and farewell, he is gone–
the active flies not conveying the idea of the immediate effect
of authority so forcibly as the passive, is gone. Perhaps this
may seem too fine a criticism; but it has induced me to
preserve as much of Chaucer's line as was consistent with
modern idiom.
[vol. ii,
p. iv]
[Introductory Advertisement. The author defends his use
of Dryden's heroic couplet:] Chaucer, had he lived at a later
period, though he would have preserved his nice discrimination
of character, and the forcible style which brings action before
the reader's eye, would have enriched his poems with all the
graces which Time, Taste, and Learning have interwoven into
the originally coarse fabric of his native tongue. To copy the
turn of thought, the boldness of figure, and the animation of
Chaucer's poems, is to copy Chaucer: to preserve his hobbling
cadences and obsolete phrases is to copy the baldness of our
language at the period when he lived. Had Chaucer lived in
the seventeenth century, he would have given us his Palamon
and Arcite, as Dryden has dressed it...
