
1803] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 7
[p. 299]... It is merely a love-tale. It is not the labour of a man's
life; but a poem which, with some previous knowledge of
human sentiments and character, and a very slight prepar¬
ation of science, the writer might perhaps be expected to
complete in about as many months, as the work is divided into
books....
It is... considerably barren of incident. There is not
enough in it of matter generating visible images in the reader,
and exciting his imagination with pictures of nature and life.
There is not enough in it of vicissitudes of fortune.... Add
to which, the catastrophe is unsatisfactory and offensive....
[p. 300] Dryden thoroughly felt this defect in the poem of Chaucer,
and has therefore changed the catastrophe when he fitted the
story for the stage, and represented the two lovers as faithful,
but unfortunate.
But, when all these deductions have been made from the
claims of the Troilus and Creseide upon our approbation, it
will still remain a work interspersed with many beautiful
passages, passages of exquisite tenderness, of great delicacy,
and of a nice and refined observation of the workings of
human sensibility. Nothing can be more beautiful, genuine,
and unspoiled by the corrupt suggestions of a selfish spirit,
than the sentiments of Chaucer's lovers. While conversing
with them, we seem transported into ages of primeval
innocence. Even Creseide is so good, so ingenuous and
affectionate, that we feel ourselves as incapable as Troilus,
of believing her false. Nor are the scenes of Chaucer's
narrative... drawn with that vagueness of manner, and
ignorance of the actual emotions of the heart, which, while
we read them, we nauseate and despise. On the contrary,
his personages always feel, and we confess the truth of their
feelings.
[p. 301] Pandarus himself comes elevated and refined from the pen
of Chaucer: his occupation loses its grossness, in the dis¬
interestedness of his motive, and the sincerity of his friendship.
In a word, such is the Troilus and Creseide, that no competent
judge can rise from its perusal without a strong impression of
the integrity and excellence of the author's disposition, and of
the natural relish he entertained for whatever is honourable,
beautiful and just....
The poem will appear to be little less than a miracle, when
