
1804] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 17
articles, we are told, “Chaucer says, on his skin a mormalle
had he and a blacke manger." Now, in the first place
Chatterton, adhering to his erroneous transcript from Chaucer,
of skinne for shinne, has made Johan Stowe lecture on the cure
of mormalles as if they were, like the leprosy, a cutaneous
distemper, and not a cancer on the bone. But, besides, he
has so far mistaken his author as to take blanc-manger, a dish
of exquisite cookery, which is pronounced by Chaucer to be
the cook's masterpiece of skill, for blacke manger, some strange
and nondescript disease... Chaucer's words are–
" But gret harme was it, as it thoughte me,
That on his shinne a mormal hadde he,
For blanc-manger that made he with the best."
1804. Scott, Sir Walter. Review of Godwin's Life of Chaucer, [in] The
Edinburgh Review, vol. iii, Jan. 1804, art. xvi, pp. 437-52.
(Miscellaneous Prose Works of Sir Walter Scott, 30 vols., Edinburgh,
1834-71, vol. xvii, pp. 55-80.)
[p.55] The perusal of this title excited no small surprise in our
critical fraternity. The authenticated passages of Chaucer's
life may be comprised in half a dozen pages; and behold two
voluminous quartos!
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. 56] The reader will learn, with admiration, that Mr. William
[p. 57] Godwin’s two quarto volumes contain hardly the vestige of an
authenticated fact concerning Chaucer, which is not to be
found in the eight pages of Messrs. Thomas Tyrwhitt and
George Ellis. The researches into the records have only pro¬
duced one or two writs, addressed to Chaucer, while clerk of
the works; the several grants and passports granted to him by
Edward III and Richard II which had been referred to by
former biographers; together with the poet's evidence in a
court of chivalry, a contract about a house, and a solitary
receipt for half a year’s salary. These, with a few documents
referring to John of Gaunt, make the Appendix to the book,
and are the only original materials brought to light by the
labours of the author.
. . . . . . . . . .
[p.65] The public are indebted to Mr. Godwin for the recovery of
[p. 66) Chaucer's evidence in a question about bearing arms, occurring
CHAUCER CRITICISM.—II.
