
34 [Southey] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1807-
own; a confession not to be admitted, till the prototypes and
masters of Chaucer, Shakspeare, and Milton are produced.   ...
[p. xiv] The first imported fashion was the Provençal, or Lemosin.
Chaucer composed his complimentary poems in this style.   ...
The Romance of the Rose... he must have translated for
its reputation, and not for its merit... it is impossible not
to regret, that the time bestowed upon this long and wearying
rigmarole, had not been employed upon the Canterbury
Tales.   ...
[p. xv] It is not easy to understand Chaucer's system of versifica¬
tion, whether it was metrical or rhythmical.  ... Avoiding
the harshness and obscurity of alliterative rhythm on the one
hand, and on the other the frequent recurrence and intricate
intertexture of rhymes which are found in some of the
romances; he preferred forms less rude than the one, less
artificial than the other; less difficult, and therefore more
favourable to perspicuity than either. Chaucer, therefore,
became the model of succeeding Poets; the ten-syllable couplet,
[p. xvi] in which his best poems are composed, has become our most
usual measure; and even when rhyme is disused, that length
of line which he considered as best adapted for narrative, is
still preferred for it.
Petrarca, Dante, and Chaucer, are the only Poets of the
dark ages whose celebrity has remained uninjured by the total
change of manners in Europe.   ... To attempt any com¬
parison between three writers, who have so little in common,
would be ridiculous; but... Chaucer displays a versatility
of talents, which neither of the others seem to have possessed:
in which only Ariosto has approached, and only Shakspeare
equalled him. Few, indeed, have been so eminently gifted
with all the qualifications of a Poet, essential or accidental.
[p. xvii] He was well versed in all the learning of his age, even of the
abstrusest kind; he had an eye and an ear, for all the sights
and sounds of nature; humour to display human follies, and
feeling to understand, and to delineate human passions. As a
painter of manners, he is accurate as Richardson; as a painter
of character, true to the life and spirit, as Hogarth... his
fame will stand. The more he is examined, the higher he
will rise in estimation. Old Poets in general, are only
valuable because they are old; on the contrary, nothing but
his age prevents Chaucer from being universally ranked
