
1818] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 95
‘a Tenement in a garden,’ adjoining to St. Mary's Chapel,
was leased by Robert Harmodesworth, Chaplain, in 1399, for
fifty-three years, at the yearly rent of fifty-three shillings and
sixpence, with liberty to distrain for a fortnight's arrears.¹
¹A copy of the original lease was engraved by the direction of
Dr. Rawlinson in 1752 [q. v. below, App. A.; for the original lease,
see above, 1399, vol. pp. 13-14].
1818. Cary, Henry Francis. Letter to the Rev. Walter Birch, [dated]
April 8, 1818, [in] Memoir of the Rev. H. F. Cary... by his
Son, 1847, 2 vols., vol. ii, p. 24.
Then, for myself, I have read. . . for the first time
Chaucer regularly through, except one tale, Patient Grisilde,
which I know so well that I passed it. This, I think, is all
the heavy artillery I can bring into the field, if it is not
insulting pleasant old Geoffrey to speak thus of him.
1818. Coleridge, Samuel Taylor. Notes of Lectures [of the course of
1818]. (Literary Remains of S. T. Coleridge, 1836-9, 4 vols, vol. i,
pp. 83, 88, 89, 231-3, 238.)
[p.83]  I dare make none [no excuse] for the gross and disgusting
licentiousness, the daring profaneness, which rendered the
Decameron of Boccaccio the parent of a hundred worse
children, fit to be classed among the enemies of the human
race;... which interposes a painful mixture in the humour
of Chaucer.
[p. 88] [Lecture III. The Troubadours–Boccaccio–Petrarch¬
Pulci—Chaucer—Spenser.].. Chaucer must be read with
an eye to the Norman-French Trouveres, of whom he is the best
representative in English. He had great powers of invention.
As in Shakspere, his characters represent classes, but in a
different manner; Shakspere’s characters are the representatives
of the interior nature of humanity, in which some element has
become so predominant as to destroy the health of the mind;
[p. 89] whereas Chaucer’s are rather representatives of classes of
manners. He is therefore more led to individualize in a mere
personal sense. Observe Chaucer's love of nature; and how
happily the subject of his main work is chosen. When you
reflect that the company in the Decameron have retired to a
place of safety from the raging of a pestilence, their mirth
provokes a sense of their unfeelingness; whereas in Chaucer
nothing of this sort occurs, and the scheme of a party on a
