
1824] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 155
[p. 176] It is not merely in a literary point of view, as works of
[p. 177] amusement and effusions of a poetical imagination, that the
writings of Chaucer are entitled to particular attention. They
are pregnant with instruction of a higher order. They are an
essential portion of the authentic history of his country;...
of the history of the national mind... The works of
Chaucer, his Canterbury Tales in particular,... bring the
genuine picture of society alive and breathing before us.  ...
The imaginative historian, who adorns his record with names
of his own creation, and selects the character he assigns to his
[p. 178] imaginary agents from the great book of nature,... may use
with freedom the genuine colours of truth, and delineate man
as he really is, with all the modifications of morals, manners,
and characteristics, which the institutions, the necessities, and
the habitudes of the age have imposed upon him. Whoever
does this is, in fact, an historian of the highest order : an his¬
torian, instructive, not to the statesman and politician only,
but to all who may peruse his record. And such an historian
is the great father of our English poetry—the venerable
Geffrey Chaucer.
[Here follows the life of Chaucer and some further criticism
of his poetry.]
1824. Unknown. The Literary History of the Provençals, [in] Knight's
Quarterly Magazine, vol. iii, p. 131.
Chaucer, in one or two of his smaller poems, appears to
have followed the style of the later Troubadours; and Dryden,
in the preface to his Fables, has borrowed from Rymer the
remark, that the Provençal was in that age the most cultivated
of modern languages, and that Chaucer profited by it to adorn
and enrich the English.
1824. Wordsworth, William. Letter to Alaric Watts, [dated] No¬
vember 16, 1824, [printed in] Letters of the Wordsworth Family,
ed. W. Knight, 3 vols., 1907, vol. ii, p. 228.
"I am disposed strenuously to recommend to your habitual
perusal the great poets of our own country who have stood
the test of ages. Shakespeare I need not name, nor Milton,
but Chaucer and Spenser are apt to be overlooked. It is
almost painful to think how far these surpass all others."
[This paragraph is reprinted as it stands from Professor Knight's text. From the
stops and quotation-marks Wordsworth seems to be quoting, but from what is
not clear; nor has the passage any relation to the paragraphs that precede and
follow it.]
