
1808] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 35
among the greatest Poets of his country: far indeed below
Shakspeare and Milton; perhaps below Spenser, for his mind
was less pure and his beauties are scattered over a wider and
more unequal surface,–but far above all others.
VI. The ornate style originated in Chaucer; he has just left
specimens enough to shew that he had tried the experiment,
and did not like it.   ...
[p. xix] VII. From Chaucer to the days of Henry VIII, no progress
was made in literature.  ...
1807. Wordsworth, William. Note to the second poem To the Daisy
(1802). [Dated 1807 by Prof. Knight.] (Poetical Works, ed. W.
Knight, 1896, vol. ii, p. 357 n.)
[Resemblance to Mr. Montgomery's poem entitled “A Field
Flower":]
Mr. Montgomery will not think any apology due to him; I
cannot, however, help addressing him in the words of the
Father of English Poets :
" Though it happe me to rehersin–
That ye han in your freshe songis saied
Forberith me, and beth not ill apaied,
Sith that ye se I doe it in the honour
Of Love, and eke in service of the Flour."
[Prologue to Legende of Good Women, ll. 78-82.]
1808. Carey, William (Picture Dealer). Critical Description of the
Procession of Chaucer's Pilgrims to Canterbury, painted by Thomas
Stothard.
[This is a pamphlet of 77 pp., prefaced by a letter from Carey
to John Leigh Philips, and followed by a critical description
of the picture, which gives a detailed account of each pilgrim.
There are Chaucer allusions all through the pamphlet; the
following are the most interesting:]
[p.9] [Opening of the ‘Critical Description.’]
Many have expressed a surprise that the Procession of
Chaucer's Pilgrims was not earlier selected by some of our
distinguished Artists. But difficulties exist in the subject
sufficient to deter the generality of minds from the under¬
taking. [Difficulty of grouping a number of figures all form¬
ally directed one way.]
[p. 11] From Chaucer's minute description, the Artist has drawn
each as a Portrait in the English costume of the 14th century.
