
1836] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 207
be the same, although the number of syllables themselves might
vary. [Footnote, stating that James Boswell (the younger) had
impugned that opinion, but that in it Southey had the sup¬
port of Farmer and Dr. Nott, who, he thought, had established
the point. He also quotes Gascoigne in this connexion.
See above, 1831, and, for Nott, above, 1815-16.] Verse
so composed will often be strictly metrical; and because
Chaucer's is frequently so, the argument has been raised that
it is always so if it be read properly... But to suppose that
it was written as iambic verse, and that the lines were
lengthened or shortened to the required measure by some¬
times pronouncing a final syllable, and sometimes letting it
[p. 118] remain mute,... is supposing that Chaucer took greater
liberties with the common pronunciation (which must
always be uniform) and relied more on the judgement of the
reader, than one who so perfectly understood the character of
his mother tongue, and was so well acquainted with the
ordinary capacities of men, can be supposed to have done,
without impeachment of his sagacity. Be this as it may, it is
no slight proof of that sagacity, that he should have pitched
the key and determined the length of verse, which... have
been found to accord best with the genius of the language;
and that his "riding rhyme," under the more dignified
denomination of the “heroic couplet,” should be the measure
which Dryden and Pope and their followers have preferred to
all others for grave and lofty subjects.
The “ornate style," which is the worst fashion that has ever
been introduced into English verse, began in Chaucer's time,
and he adopted it in some of his smaller and later pieces; per¬
haps as an experiment towards the improvement of a language
then in a state in which experiments might allowably be tried,
.... but unless his faculties were impaired by age, of which
there is no proof or indication, it is not possible that he could
have approved of it himself. His language was what he had
learnt in the country, in the city, and in the court... what
every one could understand, and every one could feel; it was
the language of passion and of real life, and therefore the
language of poetry.  ...
[p. 119] The age after Chaucer was in many respects darker than
that which preceded it; his name, however, was held in
reverence, and succeeding poets were instructed to look to him
as their exemplar.
