
1829] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 173
CHAUCER, BOCCACCIO, AND PETRARCA.
[p. 66] Petrarca. You have kept your promise like an Englishman,
[p. 67] Ser Geoffreddo: welcome to Arezzo. This gentleman is
Messer Giovanni Boccaccio, of whose unfinished Decameron,
which I opened to you in manuscript, you expressed your
admiration when we met at Florence in the spring.
Boccaccio. I was then at Certaldo, my native place, filling
up my stories, and have only to regret that my acquaintance
with one so friendly and partial to me has been formed so
late. How did Rome answer your expectation, sir?
Chaucer. I had passed through Pisa; of which city the
Campo Santo, now nearly finished, after half a century from
its foundation, and the noble street along the Arno, are
incomparably more beautiful than anything in Rome.
Petrarca. That is true. I have heard, however, some of
your countrymen declare that Oxford is equal to Pisa, in the
solidity, extent, and costliness of its structures.
Chaucer. Oxford is the most beautiful of our cities: it
would be a very fine one if there were no houses in it.
Petrarca. How is that?
Chaucer. The lath-and-plaster white-washed houses look
despicably mean under the colleges.
Boccaccio. Few see anything in the same point of view.
It would gratify me highly, if you would tell me with all
the frankness of your character and your country, what struck
you most in "the capital of the world" as the vilest slaves
in it call their great open cloaca.
Chaucer. After the remains of antiquity, I know not
whether anything struck me more forcibly than the superiority
of our English churches and monasteries.  ...
[p. 68] Boccaccio. We can not travel in the most picturesque
and romantic regions of our Italy, from the deficiency of
civilisation in the people.
Chaucer. Yet, Messer Giovanni, I never journeyed so far
through so enchanting a scenery as there is almost the whole
of the way from Arezzo to Rome, particularly round Terni
and Narni and Perugia.
Our master Virgil speaks of dreams that swarm upon the
branches of one solitary elm. In this country more than
dreams swarm upon every spray and leaf; and every murmur
of wood or water comes from and brings with it inspiration.
