
1827] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 167
1827. Taylor, George Watson. Misreading, [in the transcript of] Poems,
written in English, by Charles Duke of Orleans, [from MS.
Harleian, 682, producing a supposititious reference to Chaucer],
Roxburghe Club, 1827, p. 17.
[MS. Harl. 682 is a very clear, well-written fifteenth-century
text, and the original poem in it, fol. 8, reads:
When y am leyd to slepe as for a stound
To haue my rest y can in no manere
For all the nyght myn hert aredith round
As in the romaunce of pleasaunt pancer,
this being, so far as the last line is concerned, an exact
translation of line 4, Ballade viii, in Charles of Orleans'
French Poème de la Prison (ed. d’Héricault, Paris, 1874,
tome i, p. 21), which reads
Car toute la nuit mon cueur lit
Ou Rommant de Plaisant Penser.
It is scarcely conceivable that Mr. Taylor, the editor of the
Roxburghe Club print, read the “pancer" of the MS. as
"Chaucer," but, at any rate, he renders (without comment)
the above passage as follows:
For all the nyght myn hert aredith round
As in the romaunce of plesaunt chaucer,—
thus, with no foundation in the manuscript, turning the
passage into a Chaucer reference. This is misleading for those
readers who are not able to examine the MS.; see, for instance,
the conjecture of Dr. H. N. MacCracken in Publications of
the Modern Language Association of America, vol. xxvi,
pp. 150-1, that William de la Pole, Duke of Suffolk, may, in
translating the poems, have inserted this Chaucer reference.]
1827. Unknown. Chaucer, Sir Geoffrey, [in] Encyclopaedia Edinensis,
1827, vol. ii, pp. 254-5.
[A short article, beginning with a cautious biography, in
which nothing is stated as certainty except the birth-date
1328, Chaucer's promotions in 1389, and death-date.]
Chaucer was not only the first, but also one of the best
English poets. He was great in every kind of poetry, and
displays every kind of excellence, excepting melody and
accuracy of measure, defects which are to be ascribed to the
imperfect state of the language... [Dryden quoted. The
Court of Love, Chaucer's first poem, followed by Troilus and
Criseyde. Many of the poems are allegories; the Dream (i. e.
the Isle of Ladies) and the Flower and the Leaf mentioned,
