
274  Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1847
1847-51. The Canterbury Tales of Geoffrey Chaucer, a new text,
3 vols., printed for the Percy Society, ed. T. Wright, vols. xxiv¬
xxvi.
Cokes Tale of Gamelyn).
[Vol. i. Introduction, pp. v-xlii. Text, pp. 1-295 (with the
Vol. ii. Text, pp. 1-386.
(the Tale of Beryn).
Vol. iii. Text, pp. 1-318, with the "Merchauntes Second Tale"
The edition is annotated at the bottom of the pages.
Wright’s introduction consists of a sketch of Chaucer's life,
based on Sir N. H. Nicolas’s "Life"; an examination of
the Tales, especially of their unfinished state and arrange¬
ment; an account of the editions; and a statement of the
"Plan of the present Edition," beginning with some remarks
on Chaucerian English, and stating the editor's reasons for
the selection of Harleian MS. 7334 as the basis of the text.
Reprinted in the Universal Library, 1853, q.v. below.]
1847. Deshler, C. D. Selections from the Poetical Works of Geoffrey
Chaucer. With a concise life of that Poet... by C. D. Deshler,
London. [Wiley and Putnam’s Library of American Books.]
[The volume contains an Introduction, notes on pronuncia¬
tion, and five chapters of biography and criticism (vitiated
through the usual acceptance of the Court of Love, Testament
of Love, etc.), discussing the condition of the language and
Chaucer’s effect on it, characteristics of his poetry, estimate of
women, omission to celebrate the great personages of his age,
&c. The selections which follow are divided into five
categories : I. Rural Descriptions; II. Paintings-Female
Characters; III. Paintings-Masculine Characters; IV. Nar¬
rative Poetry; V. Miscellaneous. Among these are extracts
from the non-Chaucerian Complaint of the Black Knight,
Cuckoo and Nightingale, &c. An Appendix gives some
information on and extracts from Gower, Lydgate, Gavin
Douglas, Story of Cockaygne, and Herrick.]
1847. Halliwell (afterwards Halliwell-Phillips), James Orchard.
A Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial Words, obsolete phrases,/
proverbs and ancient customs, from the fourteenth century.
[Contains many words from Chaucer.]
1847. Hare, Julius Charles and Augustus William. Guesses at Truth,
by two Brothers. First Series, pp. 60, 151; 151-2 [use of wight
and folk in Chaucer]; 171 [use of you in Chaucer]; 307 [Chaucer's
language]; 350 [union of grave and light in Chaucer], 371.
