
216 [Hippisley.] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1837
delineation of professional characters, he has few equals, no
superiors.
[p. 78] On a general review of the history of Chaucer's reputa¬
tion, we may say that his language, which seems chiefly to
have attracted the notice of his immediate successors, rude
[p. 79] as it now appears, was with reference to his own age in itself
a marvel. How just were the grounds upon which the critics
of the days of Henry the Eighth extolled his learning, will
be more fully shown in the following chapter. His pathetic
powers, which engaged the admiration of the poets and critics
of the age of Elizabeth, continue even now to rival his genuine
comic humour... The vigorous yet finished painting¬
both of scenes and characters, serious as well as ludicrous
–with which his works abound, are still, notwithstanding
the roughness of their clothing, beauties of a highly
poetical nature. The ear may not always be satisfied,
[p. 80] but the mind of the reader is always filled; and even the
roughness of his verse, which may offend some readers, is in
many instances–at least in the case of his earlier poems–
rather to be attributed to the errors of transcribers (that
mis-writing and “misse-metring" against which he warns his
copyists) than to his own negligence.
[p. 111] [Chapter IV.] Chaucer, like Ariosto and Spenser, is
essentially a descriptive rather than a dramatic poet.  ... But
his descriptive powers are of every kind; satirical, pathetic,
picturesque...
[p. 112] The most striking instances of the poetical powers of
Chaucer, under all the three above-mentioned heads, are cer¬
tainly to be found in his great work. But, if we take into
consideration that of that great work, the general prologue,
and the ludicrous tales, are the most original portions, while
the serious stories are, without any exceptions, either imita¬
tions or translations, perhaps we shall be inclined to admit
that the minor or earlier poems of our author, afford the best
instances of those of his pathetic or picturesque descriptions
which may be strictly called his own. In these poems, the
playful satire which, on a general view of Chaucer's works,
seems to form the leading characteristic of his mind, scarcely
appears at all.   ...
[p. 124] Chaucer is a picturesque poet in the narrowest and strictest
sense of the term. [The Book of the Duchesse, Parlement
of Foules, Complaint of the Black Knight, etc., instanced.]
