
160 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1825-
1825. Unknown. Pope's Works and Character, [a review of] Roscoe's
Works of Alexander Pope, [in] The Quarterly Review, vol. xxxii,
pp. 275, 290-3.
[p. 292] Had the 'Temple of Fame' been entirely an original com¬
position, it would have approached nearer, though not have
attained, to an equality with these [Thomson's Seasons, and
Castle of Indolence]; but so much of the ingenuity of the
allegory, and so many of the images are Chaucer's, that, with
all its beauty of versification, brilliancy of expression, and
variety of added congenial beauty, it still wears the livery of
a master. Pope, accordingly, with his usual candour,
premises in the advertisement, that 'whenever any hint is
taken from Chaucer, the passage itself shall be set down in
the marginal notes': and Mr. Bowles, with his wonted candour,
observes, 'Pope seems unwilling to confess all he owes to
Chaucer' (Bowles, [edn. of Pope’s Works, 1806,] vol. ii,
[p. 293] p. 107).  ... But this and other imitations from Chaucer, as
well as all his minor translations, were done 'as exercises,'
in extreme youth; and we cannot, therefore, wonder either
at occasional failures in execution, or injudicious selections.
1826. Barrett, afterwards Browning, Elizabeth Barrett. Notes on
proof sheets of a work by Uvedale Price, [printed in] Elizabeth
Barrett Browning, Hitherto Unpublished Poems and Stories,
Bibliophile Society, Boston, 1914, 2 vols., vol. ii, pp. 67-8.
It has appeared to me that a trochee introduced before the
last foot (supposing the last foot to be an iambus) produces
an agreeable relief from the monotony of the usual heroic
structure. The following examples from Chaucer's Knight's
Tale are among the most melodious I can recollect–
"And sōlĭtāire hĕ wās ēvĕr ălōne
And wāīlĭng āll thĕ night mākĭng hĭs mōne."
1826. Dallaway, James. Anecdotes of Painting in England...
by... Horace Walpole, with... additions by the Rev. James
Dallaway, vol. i, pp. 56, 57 n. ; vol. v, pp. 304-5 [list of Vertue’s
Works, in the Catalogue of Engravers, q.v. above, vol. i, 1763,
p. 424].
[vol. i,
pp. 56,
This portrait of Chaucer [on his tomb at Westminster]
57 n.] could not have afforded any specimen of painting in the reign
of Henry IV., for it was copied from some known miniature
of him, when Nicholas Bingham [sic] erected a monument
