
1842] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 245
Maratta, and Giotto a thousand-fold better than Carlo Dolce.
On the same principle, the daybreak of Chaucer is pleasanter
to me than the hot dazzling noon of Byron.
Southey.... His [Byron's] partisans, no one of whom prob¬
ably ever read Chaucer, would be indignant at your preference.
They would wonder, but hardly with the same violence of
emotion, that he was preferred to Shakspeare. Perhaps his
countrymen in his own age, which rarely happens to literary
[p. 252] men overshadowingly great, had glimpses of his merit. One
would naturally think that a personage of Camden’s gravity,
and placed beyond the pale of poetry, might have spoken less
contemptuously of some he lived among, in his admiration of
Chaucer. He tells us both in prose and verse by implication,
how little he esteemed Shakspeare. Speaking of Chaucer
he says, “he, surpassing all others, without question, in wit,
and leaving our smattering poetasters by many leagues behind
him,
‘jam monte potitus
Ridet anhelantem dura ad fastigia turbam.’
1842. [Landor, Walter Savage.] Review of Theocritus, Bio. et
Moschus, ex recog. Aug. Meinekii, [in] The Foreign Quarterly
Review, Oct. 1842, vol. xxx, p. 180. (Longer Prose Works, ed.
C. G. Crump, 1893, 2 vols., vol. ii, p. 195, as ‘The Idylls of
Theocritus.’)
Chaucer was born before that epidemic [of conceits] broke
out which soon spread over Europe, and infected the English
poetry as badly as any.
1842. Mitford, Mary Russell. Letter to Miss Barrett [E. Barrett
Browning. dated] Aug. 18, 1842, [printed in] The Life of Mary
Russell Mitford, related in a selection from her letters, ed. by the
Rev. A. G. L’Estrange, 1870, vol. iii, p. 157-8.
What you say of Milton is full of truth. But one truth you
have, I think, not perceived, that the want of distinctive
character causes much of the heaviness of character, individu¬
ality, the power of identification, which is the salt of all
literature from Horace to Scott. It is the one great merit of
your own Chaucer.
1842. Thoreau, Henry David. Journal, Jan. 2, 1842, [printed in]
Winter. (Writings, Riverside edn., 1894-5, 10 vols., vol. viii,
p. 96.)
[Chaucer’s regret for the grossness of his early poems very
creditable to him.]
