
200  Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1835
English. Thou encounteredst Master Francis Petrarch, didst
not, when thou wentest on the embassy to Genoa?”
Chaucer’s answer was in the affirmative and was a long one,
for it related the history of the interview between the learned
inhabitant of Arqua and Geoffrey Chaucer, poet of Britain,
which interview our readers shall have fully described on some
future occasion.
A French ‘ballade,’ by the "Moral Gower," of which the
'burthen' was
"En toutz errours amour se justifie,"
was the next piece recited by our host, in a style which showed
that his acquaintance with the French language had not been
acquired "at Stratford-le-Bow." When Chaucer had finished
it, he said–
"A book a month is much to do, and I have been fain to
beg for the assistance of my friends, and they have, as you
see, kindly given it to me. Master Gower's is to my fancy a
very choice piece of verse, and this "Dit du Marguerite," by
the gallant French knight Sir John Froissart, is likewise in
good sooth much to my mind. You must come and crack a
bowl with Sir John-he's a merry man, and learned withal.
Oh!–but King Richard will be well pleased to-morrow, for
Sir John's new year's gift to his Majesty will be those chron¬
icles of the affairs of our times, which he has so long busied
himself in compiling.”
"I met Sir John in France," said Scrope, "when I was
with the Count de Foix–but had no converse with him; he
stayed but one night.  ...
" Master Froissart is a good friend of mine," said Chaucer,
"and even now I have just gotten from him a goodly poem,
which has so delighted me, that I purpose putting it into
English rhyme for the amusement of our court dames." So
saying he rose from his chair, and reached from a shelf where¬
on stood more than
Twenty bokes clothed in blake or red,
a beautifully written manuscript, the title of which he recited
as follows :—
" ‘Le Roman de Thesée, ou d’Arcite et Palemon, l'un et
l'autre de Thebes, de royal sang extraits, lesquels etant cousins¬
germains, par superflue amour de la belle Emilie, eurent
ensemble question et débat, l'un desquels à cette occasion perdit
