
282 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1849-
no wise be compared, for the difference in kind is so absolute
as to render it impossible to measure the degree; and by
Shakespeare he is unquestionably surpassed in his own
walk.  ...
As a poet of character- and as such chiefly he must be
viewed, we believe him to come nearer to Shakespeare than
any other writer in the language. There is the same vigour
in all that he pourtrays, the same tone of health belongs to it.
... We believe that no writer ever was so healthy as
[p. 326] Chaucer is essentially the poet of man. Brought up from
Chaucer.  ...
the first from among his fellows and discharging to the last
the duties of a citizen, he wandered not,–nor wished to
wander in solitary places. His poetry is that of reality.  ...
[pp. 327-  ... In many respects it seems to us that Chaucer resembles
8]
Goethe more than any of the poets of our own country. He
has the same mental completeness and consequent versatility
which distinguish the German; the same love of reality;
the same clearness and cheerfulness; and, in seeming con¬
tradiction to this latter characteristic, the same preference for
grief over the other passions, in his poetical delineations. In
minor respects, he also resembles him, and in one, not
unimportant, as marking a similarity of mental organization,
that, namely, of betaking himself at the close of a long life
spent in literature and affairs, to the study of the physical
sciences, as if here alone the mental craving for the positive
could find satisfaction.
1849. Whittier, John Greenleaf. Margaret Smith’s Journal, Boston,
1859 [not in B.M.]. (Writings, Riverside Edn., 1888-89, 7 vols.,
vol. v, Prose, vol. i, p. 51.)
I think old Chaucer hath it right in his Pardoner's Tale
[ll. 549-55]:—
A likerous thing is wine, and drunkenness
Is full of striving and of wretchedness [etc.].
1850. Boker, George Henry. Letter to R. H. Stoddard, [dated] Jan. 7,
1850, [quoted in] Recollections... by R. H. Stoddard, New
York, 1903, p. 186.
Read Chaucer for strength, read Spenser for ease and
sweetness, read Milton for sublimity and thought, read
Shakespeare for all these things and for something else which
is his alone. Get out of your age as far as you can.
