
232  Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1841
sometimes mute. Dan Chaucer makes at his pleasure words
long or short, dissyllabic or trisyllabic; and this he has
himself told us–
" But for the rime is light and lewde,
Yet make it somewhat agréable,
Though some verse fail in a sylláble."
in his later work, the Tales; but it is evident that Chaucer
... The verse of Chaucer seems more carefully regulated
trusted his cadences to his ear, and his verse is therefore
usually rhythmical, and accidentally metrical.
 . . . . . . . . . . .
[p. 272] Are the works of our great poet to be consigned to the literary
dungeon of the antiquary's closet? I fear that there is more
than one obstruction which intervenes between the poet’s
name, which will never die, and the poet’s works, which will
never be read. A massive tome, dark with the Gothic type,
whose obsolete words and difficult phrases, and, for us,
uncadenced metre, are to be conned by a glossary as obsolete
as the text, to be perpetually referred to, to the interruption
of all poetry and all patience, appalled even the thorough¬
paced antiquary, Samuel Pegge, as appears by his honest
confession [q.v. above, vol. i, p. 502]. Already a practised
bibliosopher proclaims, alluding to the edition by Tyrwhit
of Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales, "And who reads any
other portion of the poet?" Yet the Canterbury Tales
are but the smallest portion of Chaucer's works! But
some skilful critics have perpended and decided differently;
even among the projected labours of Johnson was an edition
[p. 273] of Chaucer’s works, and Godwin, when diligently occupied on
this great poet, with just severity observed that "a vulgar
judgment had been propagated by slothful and indolent
persons, that the Canterbury Tales are the only part of the
works of Chaucer worthy the attention of a modern reader,
and this has contributed to the wretched state in which his
works are permitted to exist."
 . . . . . . . . . . .
[p. 274] It is true that the language of Chaucer has failed, but not
the writer. The marble which Chaucer sculptured has be¬
trayed the noble hand of the artist; the statue was finished;
but the grey and spotty veins came forth, clouding the lucid
whiteness.
