
1826] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 161
to his memory in Westminster Abbey, in 1550, as the
inscription proves, at which time it was painted against the
wall. No trace is now visible. A miniature of Chaucer,
on horseback, as he represents himself journeying with the
pilgrims to Canterbury, is preserved in a MS. of his poems,
belonging to the Marquis of Stafford [the Earl of Ellesmere],
which has been engraved in Todd's Illustrations of Gower
and Chaucer, 8vo, 1810. Other MSS. have his portrait, but
usually of half length only.
[For Walpole's original edn. see above, vol. i, 1763, p. 423.]
1826. Digby, Kenelm Henry. The Broad Stone of Honour, Book I,
Godefridus, 1829 edn. [1st of the enlarged version in B.M.], p. 167.
It is always men who are impious and obscene, like our
‘reverend’ Chaucer, who have the most bitter sarcasm for
expressing the impiety and vice of others.
[For a reference in the first and short version of the book see above, 1822.
According to D.N.B., the 1st edn. of this enlarged version appeared in 1826-7.]
1826. Hazlitt, William. Of Persons One Would Wish to Have Seen,
[in] The New Monthly Magazine, Jan., new series, vol. xvi, p. 35.
(Reprinted in Winsterslow, 1839, pp. 41-3; Collected Works of
William Hazlitt, ed. Waller and Glover, 1902-6, 13 vols., vol. xii,
pp. 29-30.)
Some one then inquired of B— [Charles Lamb] if we
could not see from the window the Temple-walk in which
Chaucer used to take his exercise; and on his name being
put to the vote, I was pleased to find that there was a general
sensation in his favour, in all but A — [William Ayrton,
the musician], who said something about the ruggedness of
the metre, and even objected to the quaintness of the ortho¬
graphy. I was vexed at this superficial gloss... and asked
if he did not think it would be worth while to scan the eye
that had first greeted the muse in that dim twilight and
early dawn of English literature,... to watch those lips that
"lisped in numbers, for the numbers came"-as by a miracle,
or as if the dumb should speak! Nor was it alone that he had
been the first to tune his native tongue (however imperfectly
to modern ears); but he was himself a noble, manly character,
standing before his age and striving to advance it; a
pleasant humourist withal.  ...
B— put it to me if I should like to see Spenser as well as
Chaucer; and I answered without hesitation, “No"; for that
CHAUCER CRITICISM.—II.
