
1829] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 175
of the heavier and riper grain by the conveyance and the
handling of it. And I will attempt to show Englishmen what
Italians are; how much deeper in thought, intenser in
feeling, and richer in imagination, than ever formerly: and
I will try whether we can not raise poetry under our fogs, and
merriment among our marshes. We must first throw some
litter about it, which those who come after us may remove.
Petrarca. Do not threaten, Ser Geffreddo! Englishmen act.
Boccaccio. Messer Francesco is grown melancholy at the
spectre of the tribune. Relate to us some amusing tale, either
of court or war.
Chaucer. It would ill become me, signors, to refuse what
I can offer: and truly I am loth to be silent, when a fair
occasion is before me of adverting to those of my countrymen
who fought in the battle of Cressy, as did one or two or more
of the persons that are the subjects of my narrative.
Boccaccio. Enormous and horrible as was the slaughter of
the French in that fight, and hateful as is war altogether to
you and me, Francesco! I do expect from the countenance of
Ser Geoffreddo, that he will rather make us merry than sad.
Chaucer. I hope I may, the story not wholly nor principally
relating to the battle.
[Here Chaucer tells the story of Sir Magnus Lucy of
Charlecote.]
[p.  97] Now Messer Francesco, I may call upon you, having seen
you long since throw aside your gravity, and at last spring
up alert, as though you would mount for Picardy.
Petrarca. A right indeed have you acquired to call upon
me, Ser Geoffredo; but you must accept from me the produce
of our country.  ...
[p. 98] Boccaccio. Well, go on with him.
Petrarca. I do think, Giovanni, you tell a story a great deal
more naturally; but I will say plainly what my own eyes
have remarked, and will let the peculiarities of men appear
as they strike me, whether they are in symmetry with our
notions of character, or not.
Chaucer. The man of genius may do this: no other will
attempt it. He will discover the symmetry, the relations,
and the dependencies, of the whole: he will square the
strange problematic circle of the human heart.  ...
[p. 108] After this narration, Messer Francesco walked toward the
high altar and made his genuflexion: the same did Messer
