
1843] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 251
vigorous Saxon tongue, when it was neglected by the court,
and had not yet attained to the dignity of a literature, and
rendered a similar service to his country to that which Dante
rendered to Italy... In the [Prologue to the] Testament of
[p. 488] Love he writes, “Let then clerkes enditen in Latin, for they
have the propertie of science... and let Frenchmen in their
French also enditen their queinte termes... and let us
shewe our fantasies in soche wordes as we lerneden of our
dames tonge." He will know how to appreciate Chaucer best
who has come down to him the natural way, through the
meagre pastures of Saxon and ante-Chaucerian poetry.   ...
[p. 489] There is no wisdom that can take place of humanity, and
we find that in Chaucer. We can expand at last in his
breadth... He was worthy to be a citizen of England, while
Petrarch and Boccaccio lived in Italy, and Tell and Tamerlane
in Switzerland and in Asia, and Bruce in Scotland, and
Wickliffe, and Gower, and Edward the Third, and John of
Gaunt, and the Black Prince were his own countrymen as well
as contemporaries; all stout and stirring names.  ... On the
whole, Chaucer impresses us as greater than his reputation.  ...
The affectionate mention which succeeding early poets make
of him, coupling him with Homer and Virgil, is to be taken
into the account in estimating his character and influence.  ...
p. 490] We admire Chaucer for his sturdy English wit.   . . . But
though it [the Prologue] is full of good sense and humanity,
it is not transcendent poetry.  ...
[p. 491] Humor, however broad and genial, takes a narrower view
than enthusiasm. To his own finer vein he added all the
common wit and wisdom of his time.  ... His genius does
not soar like Milton's, but is genial and familiar.  ... The
charm of his poetry consists often only in an exceeding
naturalness, perfect sincerity, with the behaviour of a child
rather than of a man.
Gentleness and delicacy of character are everywhere ap¬
parent in his verse.  ... Nor can we be mistaken respecting
[p. 492] the essential purity of his character, disregarding the apology
of the manners of the age. A simple pathos and feminine
gentleness, which Wordsworth only occasionally approaches
but does not equal, are peculiar to him.  ...
Such pure and genuine and childlike love of Nature is
hardly to be found in any poet.  ...
[p. 493] There are many poets of more taste, and better manners,
