
1849] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 281
bold, though antiquated expression, he shows us the character
of a "Doctour of Phisicke."
"For gold in phisike is a cordial,
Therefore he loved gold in special."
[Prol. ll. 443-4.]
Such are a few samples of his manner of describing his
heroes and heroines: he gives us an outline cap-à-pie; un¬
covers the mind and shows us the very heart. Like Shakspeare
he had an intellect which rose far above all competition in
its power of judging character.  ... For conciseness and energy
united, come to the Tales of Chaucer.
1849. Unknown. Chaucer, [in] The North British Review, Edinburgh,
1849, vol. x, pp. 293-328. [A review of Nicolas’s edition of the
Works, Saunders' Cabinet Pictures and Canterbury Tales, Deshler's
Selections, Horne’s Poems Modernised, and Cowden Clarke’s Tales
from Chaucer and Riches of Chaucer.]
[p. 294] The first question, as it seems to us which we are bound
at once to ask or to answer, is–belongs he [Chaucer]
to the living or to the dead; does he or does he not speak
words of living interest to living men; is he or is he not
an integral part of our existing civilisation?...
... So far is his story from being strange and distant to us,
that we believe every one who investigates it for the first
time will feel astonished that it should have been possible
for any one, in the times of Cressy and of Poictiers, to
lead a life in all respects so nearly resembling that of an
accomplished and successful civilian at the present day.
[Here follow an appreciation of recent work on Chaucer,
especially that of Saunders and Nicolas, who are both con¬
trasted favourably with Godwin; and a life of Chaucer, largely
based on the latter, occupies pp. 299-314.]
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. 324] In its form it [the speech which Chaucer employed] was
the Saxon of Edward the Confessor, with such flectional
modifications as three centuries of further development had
effected; and in its substance it had superadded to the great
Saxon substratum such Norman words as the contact of three
centuries had gradually introduced...
[p. 325] A few observations before parting, for the purpose of fixing,
in some measure, the rank that he is entitled to hold among
our poets.   ... We do not venture to equal him to
the two greatest of them. With Milton, indeed, he can in
