
204 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1836
Tales he seems to have absolutoly lost his wits; his pencil was
as inferior to that of the former, as his burin was to that of
Cromek, who engraved Stothard’s immortal picture.
[Stothard's picture was published by Cromek, but engraved by Schiavonetti.]
1836. Dunham, Samuel Astley. Chaucer, [in Lardner's] Cabinet
Cyclopædia (Lives of the most eminent literary and scientific
men of Great Britain.—Early Writers), pp. 125-172, 188, 205,
215, 298-9, 312-13, 315, 319, 351.
[p. 125] [A life of the pòet, forty-seven pages, followed by a detailed
notice of all his poems; as well as of some not by him.]
[p. 169] Of the literary and poetical character of Chaucer, it may
be remarked, that to no individual, perhaps, has our language
been more indebted than to the author of the Canterbury
Tales. He found his native tongue a mixed and uncouth
dialect of Norman-Saxon, rude, and undigested, and with no
writers whom he could consider in any respect as a guide or
[p. 170] model.... He therefore necessarily turned his eyes to
foreign resources; and we find that the greater part of his
poetical career was employed in translating... from the
Latin, French, and Italian. In doing this, however, he en¬
riched his own language with a vast store of verbal wealth...
and, moreover, moulded what he had taken into a form of
such unprecedented beauty and perspicuity, when compared
with any previous English poem, that those who immediately
succeeded him scarcely ever speak of his style but in terms of
enthusiastic rapture. When we consider, indeed, how greatly
superior to his contemporaries was the mechanism of his
versification, which, though from change of accent unaccom¬
modated to a modern ear, was, in the then construction of the
language, beyond all example harmonious and correct...
the admiration of his disciples, however warmly expressed,
seems justly his due. It may, in short, be affirmed, that even
now, by him who will take the trouble of becoming familiar
with the style of Chaucer, there will often be found, both in
his diction and versification, a certain natural sweetness,
simplicity, and naïveté, hardly to be met with elsewhere.
If, turning... to the consideration of the higher
attributes which more immediately constitute the poet, we
contrast what he has produced in these departments with the
age in which he lived,... can we hesitate in pronouncing
