
1834] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 191
of them by words still in use out of Chaucer himself, or
Gower his disciple.
I don't want this myself; I rather like to see the significant
terms which Chaucer unsuccessfully offered as candidates for
admission into our language; but surely so very slight a
change of the text may well be pardoned, even by black¬
letterati, for the purpose of restoring so great a poet to his
ancient and most deserved popularity.
1834. D’Israeli, Isaac. Curiosities of Literature, 9th edn., 1834, 6 vols.,
vol. vi, p. 68. (Edn. 1849, 3 vols., vol. iii, p. 321.)
[For other edns. see above, 1807 and 1823.]
Dreams at the Dawn of Philosophy.
[p. 821] But that they [enchantments] were not unknown to Chaucer,
appears in his “Frankelein’s Tale," where, minutely describing
them, he communicates the same pleasure he must himself
have received from the ocular illusions of the "Tregetoure"
or "Jogelour." Chaucer ascribes the miracle to "a natural
magique," in which, however, it was as unsettled, whether the
"Prince of Darkness" was a party concerned.
"For I am siker that there be sciences"
[and twelve following lines, Frankeleyns Tale, ll. 411-23].
1834. Hunt, James Henry Leigh. Fairies, [in] Leigh Hunt's London
Journal, Oct. 8, 1834, p. 217. [Reprinted in A Day by the Fire,
1870, pp. 98-9.]
Chaucer's notion of Fairies was a confused mixture of elves
and romance-ladies, and Ovid and Catholic diablerie.  ...
His Lady Abbess [sic] wears a broach exhibiting a motto out
of Virgil. Elves, therefore, and Provençal Enchantresses, and
the Nymphs of the Metamorphoses, and the very devils of
the Pope and St. Anthony, were all fellows well met, all
supernatural beings, living in the same remote regions of
fancy, and exciting the gratitude of the poet. He is angry
with the friars for making more solemn distinctions, and dis¬
placing the little elves in their walks; and he runs a capital
jest upon them, which has become famous.
In olde dayes of the Kinge Artour
[and 23 following lines].
In another poem, we meet with Pluto and Proserpine as
the King and Queen of Faerie; where they sing and dance
