
198  Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1835
1835. T., W. I. The Court Magazine in the Fourteenth Century,
[in] The Court Magazine, vol vi, pp. 254-57.
[p. 254] [The writer entering Westminster Abbey, notices one present:]
The individual who excited this interest in me was of
middle stature, somewhat inclined to corpulency, and expen¬
sively attired in a robe of deep purple. His countenance was
placid and benevolent; his eyes, which were large and mild,
were kept constantly upon a richly illuminated missal which
he held in his hand, with the contents of which, however, he
seemed not so deeply busied but that some fleeting and not
very grave thoughts had power ever and anon to diffuse a
satirical but good-natured smile over his face. His com¬
plexion was fair, his forehead broad and smooth, his hair thin
and of silvery whiteness, as was likewise his graceful and
becoming beard.
At length the service concluded, and I took the opportunity
of inquiring of my companion whether he knew the individual
who had so arrested my attention.
“Know him indeed,” quoth Master Scrope, “Marry do I—
and so shalt thou too."...
[After the service the writer and Scrope follow Chaucer
to the house adjacent :]
[p. 255] "Give you good even, Master Geoffrey," said Scrope, "I
have brought a friend with me who loveth the Muse, and
would fain hold a little converse with her favourite son,
Master Geoffrey Chaucer."
Master Geoffrey Chaucer! How the words rang in my
ears–I could scarce return thanks for the kindly welcome
with which the great bard greeted me, so intense was the
delight I experienced at finding myself thus suddenly and
agreeably confronted with him. There before me sat he
whose muse I had so long and so earnestly admired.
. . . . . . . . . .
[Chaucer provides wine, and proceeds :]
" When I have done my reckonings in the Exchequer, I have
gotten a copy of verses to write for my good Lord of Vere, or
my Lady Blanche. Let alone his Majesty himself, who is
ever and anon crying out, ‘Is your muse turned sluggard,
Master Geoffrey, that we hear nought of her faith [sic, for
"i' faith"]!'  I believe they wish me to write every week
a poem as long as the siege of Troy. So my scribe Adam
