
276 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1848
[n.a. 1848.] Coleridge, Hartley. Chaucer, [printed in] Poems, 1851,
2 vols., vol. ii, pp. 289-91. (Complete Poetical Works, Muses'
Library, [1907,] pp. 317-8.)
[According to information kindly given by Mr. E. H. Coleridge, the copy ot Ander¬
son’s Poets in which this was written probably did not come into Hartley Coleridge's
possession (though nominally given to him by his father in 1803) till the death of his
uncle Southey in 1843. These lines must therefore have been written between that
year and the end of 1848, as Hartley Coleridge died 6 Jan. 1849.]
How wayward oft appears the poet's fate,
Who still is born too early or too late!...
The fleeting language, to its trust untrue,
Vext by the jarring claims of old and new,
Defeats his beauty, makes his sense the fee
Of a blind, guessing, blundering glossary.
Thus Chaucer, quaintly clad in antique guise,
With unfamiliar mien scares modern eyes.
No doubt he well invented–nobly felt¬
But O ye Powers! how monstrously he spelt.
His syllables confound our critic men,
Who strive in vain to find exactly ten...
His language too, unpolished and-unfixt,
Of Norman, Saxon, Latin, oddly mixt–
Such words might please th' uneducated ears
That hail'd the blaring trumpets of Poictiers...
Yet, thou true Poet! let no judgment wrong
Thy rich, spontaneous, many-coloured song;
Just mirror of a bold, ambitious age
In passion furious, in reflection sage!...
When every beast, and bird, and flower, and tree,
Convey'd a meaning and a mystery;
And men in all degrees, sorts, ranks, and trades,
Knights, Palmers, Scholars, Wives, devoted Maids,
In garb, and speech, and manners, stood confest...
And told their state and calling by their vest.
[n.a. 1848.] Coleridge, Hartley. Notes on Shakespeare, [written in a
copy of Stockdale's edition of the Plays, printed in] Essays and
Marginalia, ed. Derwent Coleridge, 1851, p. 189.
It is remarkable that he [Shakespeare] has scarce adopted a
single expression from the “Troilus and Cresseide" of Chaucer,
the most beautiful diary of love ever written. The work of
Lollius is not to be found. I am disposed to think that
Chaucer, in disowning the invention of this sweet poem, only
followed the common practice of the minstrels.
