
178 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1830
virtues inferior to this; his incongruities, e.g. the “cooke
scalded for all his longe ladle." The great architect of our
versification, but not an importer of French words. His
prolixity, like his coarseness, a fault of his time.]
[p. 762] [The beauties] of Chaucer may be compared to flowers which
we collect in a long journey, numerous in the sum, but
collected widely asunder. This expression may appear
irreverend to those who are enamoured of old English and
obsolete spelling, merely because it is old and obsolete; but
the reader who sits down to Chaucer, expecting wonders in
every page, will find, that though there is much to reward
his patience, there is also something to exercise it.
1830. Moore, Thomas. Letters and Journals of Lord Byron, with
Notices of his Life by Thomas Moore, 2 vols, vol. i, p. 30.
(1 vol. ed. 1908, pp. 15, 49, 123, 391.) [See above, Byron, 1807,
1811, 1819.]
[Moore quotes Dr. Glennie, Byron's schoolmaster at Dul¬
wich:] His reading in history and poetry was far beyond the
usual standard of his age, and in my study he found many
books... among others, a set of our poets from Chaucer to
Churchill, which I am almost tempted to say he had more
than once perused from beginning to end.
1830. Murray, Sir Charles Augustus. Memorandum, [dated June, 1830,
printed in] Goethes Gesprāche, Gesamtausgabe, neu herausgegeben
von Flodoard Frhr. von Biedermann, 1909-11, 5 vols., vol. iv,
p. 286. (The Hon. Sir Charles Murray, K.C.B., a memoir, by...
Sir Herbert Maxwell, 1898, p. 75.)
After a few minutes general conversation he [Goethe]
pointed to a large volume lying before him on the table,
and said–
"It is curious that when your visit was announced to me,
I was engaged in making a few notes on your Old English
literature. Is that a subject that has ever engaged your
attention?" To this I was fortunately able to make an
affirmative reply, as I had not long before, when at Oxford,
spent some time in the study of Anglo-Saxon, and was, more¬
over, well up in Chaucer, which enabled me to elucidate a
few old words and phrases which he had marked as requiring
explanation.
