
1836] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 209
Early in the last century, John Urry, of Christ's [sic] Church,
Oxford, first undertook to give a perfect and complete text of
Chaucer's works; and, to judge by the list of manuscripts
which he has left us, he had no reason for complaining of lack
of materials. But, in spite of the encomiums which were
lavished upon him by the editor who finished his edition; in
spite of "his skill in the northern language spoken in the
Lowlands of Scotland," which “qualified him to read this
poet with more ease and pleasure than one altogether bred
be-south the Trent could do, without more than common
application;" still Urry was too ignorant of the language and
spirit of his author, too deficient in correct philological know¬
ledge, to perform, with any degree of success, the task he had
undertaken... His list of manuscripts, too, is a mere
parade...
[p. 504] [A passage in praise of Tyrwhitt's work, with some remarks
on orthography, and some quotations from Orm, the philo¬
logical value of whose work Tyrwhitt overlooked.]
[vol. vi,
pp. 44-8]
[An attack on Cowden Clarke's Riches of Chaucer, fol¬
lowed by eulogy of the Prologue, with extracts, descriptions
of the characters, and quotations from Piers Plowman.]
1836. Unknown. Antiquarian Researches Society of Antiquaries,
[in] The Gentleman's Magazine, June 1836, new series, vol. v,
p. 648.
Mr. Limburne exhibited [at the Society of Antiquaries]
a portrait in oil of Chaucer, supposed to be an original from
Harbottle Castle, Northumberland.
1836. Unknown. Review of Sir Harris Nicolas's The Controversy
between Sir Richard Scrope and Sir Robert Grosvenor in the Court
of Chancery, [q. v. above, 1832, in] The Quarterly Review, vol. Ivi,
pp. 15, 27-8.
[pp.
27-8]
In Chaucer's deposition... we think there are traces of
the liveliness and picturesque fancy of the poet. Being asked,
among other questions, if he had ever heard of any interruption
or challenge made by Sir Robert Grosvenor, or his ancestors,
to the use of the arms in dispute by the Scropes, he does not
content himself with saying "No!" but adds the following
. anecdote:—
"He was once in Friday-street, London, and walking through
CHAUCER CRITICISM.— II.
