
1837] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 219
English or French books can we find which were extant
when Lady Jane Grey and Queen Elizabeth received their
education? Chaucer, Gower, Froissart, Comines, Rabelais,
nearly complete the list.
1837. Southey, Robert. Preface to his Poetical Works, collected by
himself, 10 vols., vol. i, pp. viii, 193 n.
... I took Spenser for my master. I drank also betimes of
Chaucer's well. The taste which had been acquired in that
school was confirmed by Percy’s "Reliques" and Warton’s
"History of English Poetry," and a little later by Homer and
the Bible.
1837. Unknown. Chaucer, [in] The Penny Cyclopædia, 1833-58,
vol. vii, 1837, pp. 10-11.
[This article is chiefly biographical, and contains the usual
incorrect account of Chaucer's education at Oxford and
Cambridge, his authorship of the Court of Love, the Black
Knight, and the Flower and the Leaf, and his exile and
imprisonment. "A little pains would enable any one to master
his language and versification, and the pains would be amply
rewarded." Quotations from Warton and Godwin.]
1837. Unknown. Griselda, the Clerke's Tale. Re-made from Chaucer,
[in] Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine, May, 1837, vol. xli, pp.
655-67.
[This version begins:
In fair Saluzzo, lovely to behold,
Down at the root of Vesulus the cold,
A marquis whilom ruled that pleasant plain, etc.]
1837. Unknown. Review of Hallam's Introduction to the Literature
of Europe, [q. v. above, 1837, in] The Quarterly Review, Feb. 1837,
vol. Iviii, pp. 37, 38.
After Italy, England could boast in Chaucer, the greatest
poet of these ages. But Chaucer's excellence lay in fertile
and graceful invention; and in the vivid and humorous de¬
lineation of manners... rather than in the high perfection
of language or melody of verse. The foreign element, the
French, with which Chaucer, or perhaps the fashion of the
time, the Norman blood and the French wars, enriched our
language, is not yet blended and harmonized; it lies, as it
were, in separate and distinct masses, not yet having passed
through the amalgamating process of common usage. The
difficulties of Chaucer's versification are perhaps most reason¬
