
1836] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 205
him one of the most extraordinary men to which his country
has given birth?...
[p. 171] In knowledge of human life, and in the power of delineating
it, he has no superior, save Shakspeare, with whom, indeed,
in universality of talent, he may justly be compared.
1836. Garnett, Richard, the Elder. English Dialects, [in] The
Quarterly Review, Feb., 1836, vol. Iv, pp. 380-82. (The Philo¬
logical Essays of R. Garnett, edited by his Son, 1859, pp. 70-72.)
[Chaucer's use of north country dialect in the Reves Tale,
and especially of the word "lathe,” a barn.]
1836. Ruskin, John. Letter to his father, from Herne Hill, 25th
March. (Works, ed. E. T. Cook and A. Wedderburn, 1903-12,
39 vols., vol. xxxvi, p. 6.)
I sit down to write of I know not what. I intend to
commence with our third lecture, English literature [by the
Rev. Thomas Dale]. Four lectures on this subject have spoken
of four celebrated authors of old time–Sir John Mandeville,
Sir John Gower, Chaucer, and Wickliffe. We are made
acquainted with their birth, parentage, education, etc.; the
character of their writings is spoken of, and extracts are read
as examples of their style. These extracts are always interest¬
ing, frequently entertaining, sometimes laughable, although
the laugh of the hearer is generally at, not with, the author.
The writings of the poets before Chaucer are like— Lifting
my eyes off the paper in search of a simile, they encounter a
piece of the sky seen through one of the very large panes of
our drawing-room window... [there] are long lines of grey
cloud, broken away into thin white fleeces, which are standing
still in the heavens, for there is no breeze to move them, and
between those grey clouds is seen here and there a piece of
excessive value, which is not dark, but deep, pure, far away,
which the eye seems to plunge into and go on, on, on, into the
stillness of its distance, until the grey cloud closes over it and
it is gone. That bit of sky is like one of these old poems,
cloudy and grey, uninteresting; but ever and anon through
the quaintness of his language or uncouthness of expression
breaks the mind of the poet, pure and noble and glorious, and
leading you away with it into fascination, and then the cloud
closes over him and he is gone.
