
174 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1829
Never shall I forget the hour when my whole soul was carried
away from me by the cataract of Terni, and when all things
existing were lost to me in its stupendous waters. The
majestic woods that bowed their heads before it; the sun
that was veiling his glory in mild translucent clouds over the
furthest course of the river; the moon, that suspended her
orb in the very centre of it, seemed ministering Powers,
themselves in undiminished admiration of the marvel they
had been looking on through unnumbered ages. What are the
works of man in comparison with this? What indeed, are
the other works of Nature?
Petrarca. Ser Giovanni! this, which appears even too great
for Nature, was not too great for man. Our ancestors achieved
it. Curius Dentatus, in his consulate, forbade the waters of
the Velinus to inundate so beautiful a valley, and threw them
down this precipice into the Nar.  ...
[p. 69] Chaucer. I was not forgetful that we heard the story from
our guide; but I thought him a boaster: and now for the
first time I learn that any great power hath been exerted for
any great good. Roads were levelled for aggression, and vast
edifices were constructed either for pride or policy, to com¬
memorate some victory, to reward the Gods for giving it, or
to keep them in the same temper. There is nothing of which
men appear to have been in such perpetual apprehension, as
the inconstancy of the deities they worship.
Many thanks, Ser Francesco, for reminding me of what
the guide asserted, and for teaching me the truth. I thought
the fall of the Velinus not only the work of Nature, but the
most beautiful she had ever made on earth. My prevention,
in regard to the country about Rome, was almost as great,
and almost as unjust to Nature, from what I had heard of it
both at home and abroad. In the approach to the eternal
city, she seems to have surrendered much of her wildness,
and to have assumed all her stateliness and sedateness, all her
awfulness and severity.....
[p. 70] Boccaccio. If Ser Geoffreddo felt in honest truth any
pleasure at reading my Decameron, he owes me a tithe at least
of the stories it contains: for I shall not be so courteous as
to tell him that one of his invention is worth ten of mine, until
I have had all his ten from him: if not now, another day.
Chaucer. Let life be spared to me, and I will carry the
[p. 71] tithe in triumph through my country, much as may be shed
