
1841] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 241
[A small tract of 24 pages; the editor says in a prefatory
note: “ ‘The Parson's Tale,’ which in Chaucer is a Homily,
has been abridged and adapted as a specimen of the doctrines
of the 'Holy Chirche' of England, in the olden time (circa)
1370." The "Postscript" at the end (p. 22) begins, "The
Prologue has been adapted, and the concluding lines metred,
from Chaucer: the latter being, in the original, a prayer
at the end of his 'Canterbury Tales,' in which he expresses
his sorrow and regret at the ribaldry and pollution contained
in his writings. An author should never forget, that when he
has passed into another world, his works, if calculated to
corrupt, may still be doing their mischief, and... his crimes
may thus be extended... through centuries." A few notes
follow.]
[a. 1841.] Unknown. The Book of the Poets (Chaucer to Beattie), pp.
xvi-xviii [Essay on English Poetry; enthusiastic praise of Chaucer’s
poetry], 2 [biographical sketch of Chaucer], 3-7 [Extracts, un¬
modernized, from the Knightes Tale, Prologue and Sir Thopas,
and the Good Counsail. On p. 3 is an engraving of the inter¬
ruption by Theseus of the duel between Palamon and Arcite.
For the serial review by Elizabeth Barrett, see below, 1842].
[The "new edition" of this book, 1841, is the first in the English Catalogue; that
of 1846, with steel engravings after Corbould, is the first in B.M. The references
given above are to this edn.]
1841. Unknown. Review of Horne and Wordsworth's Poems of
Geoffrey Chaucer Modernised, [in] The Athenæum, 6 Feb. 1841,
pp. 107-8.
[p.107] To extend a taste for this great poet has been the task
of the several writers who have united to produce the work
before us, which we venture to predict, without much pre¬
tension to prophecy, will do no more to make Chaucer read,
than Ogle, or Lipscombe, Pope, Dryden, or Wordsworth, have
done already. To our thinking, the greatest help ever given
to Chaucer, has been in the cheap reprint of his ‘Canterbury
Tales,’ in Dove’s Classics and Bell’s Poets; the low price
of the volumes induced purchasers; and if men will only
attempt to read, they will soon relish and appreciate, for
Chaucer is as much a poet for the many as Shakspeare
himself.   . . .
Chaucer, in this modern version, is as much like old
Geoffrey as Sprat and Flatman are like Pindar. [Much more
very severe condemnation of the plan and execution of the
book.]
CHAUCER CRITICISM.—II.
