
270 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1846
them in the general category of human kind. The gangrene
which the Cook had on his shin, and which has been con¬
sidered as a remarkable instance of the gratuitous, is, on the
contrary (besides its masterly intimation of the perils of luxury
in general), painfully in character with a man accustomed to
breathe an unhealthy atmosphere, and to be encouraging bad
humours with tasting sauces and syrups. Besides, the Cook
turns out to be a drunkard.
[p. 76] Chaucer's comic genius is so perfect, that it may be said to
include prophetic intimations of all that followed it...
One of its characteristics is a certain tranquil detection of
particulars, expressive of generals; as in the instance just
mentioned of the secret infirmity of the Cook. Thus the
Prioress speaks French; but it is "after the school of Stratford
at Bow." Her education was altogether more showy than
substantial. The Lawyer was the busiest man in the world,
and yet he "seemed busier than he was." He made something
out of nothing, even in appearances.
Another characteristic is his fondness for seeing the spiritual
in the material; the mind in the man's aspect. He is as
studious of physiognomy as Lavater, and far truer. Observe,
too, the poetry that accompanies it,–the imaginative sympathy
in the matter of fact. His Yeoman, who is a forester, has a
head "like a nut." His Miller is as brisk and healthy as the
air of the hill on which he lives, and as hardy and as coarse¬
grained as his conscience. We know, as well as if we had
ridden with them, his oily-faced Monk; his lisping Friar (who
was to make confession easy to the ladies); his carbuncled
[p. 77] Summoner or Church-Bailiff, the grossest form of ecclesiastical
sensuality; and his irritable money-getting Reve or Steward,
with his cropped head and calf-less legs, who shaves his beard
as closely as he reckons with his master's tenants.
The third great quality of Chaucer's humour is its fair
play;—the truth and humanity which induces him to see
justice done to good and bad, to the circumstances which
moke men what they are, and the mixture of right and wrong,
of wisdom and of folly, which they consequently exhibit.
His worst characters have some little saving grace of good¬
nature, or at least of joviality and candour. Even the Pardoner,
however impudently, acknowledges himself to be a “vicious
man." His best people, with one exception, betray some
infirmity. The good Clerk of Oxford, for all his simplicity
