
196 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1835
prolixity, both of the time. Chaucer not only a smooth but
a powerful and various versifier; still doubtful whether his
prosody was always correct in the modern sense.
The 5 nos. are apportioned as follows : 1, biography and
criticism, Prologue; 2, physical life and movement, Knightes
Tale; 3, pathos, Knightes and Man of Law’s Tales; 4,
Griselda; 5, “further specimens" of his pleasantry and satire,
Wife of Bath’s Tale, Nonne Prestes Tale, etc.; 6, descrip¬
tion, portrait painting, and fine sense; [7] omission from the
preceding no., a long extract from the Flower and the
Leaf.]
1835. Hunt, James Henry Leigh. Review [of] Three New Books,
[including Cowden Clarke’s Riches of Chaucer, in] Leigh Hunt's
London Journal, March 25, 1835, p. 89.
We have also to express a doubt, whether Chaucer's versi¬
fication is so invariably regular in its construction as Mr.
Clarke supposes; a doubt which we express with the less
willingness, because we have done something in our day
towards spreading the contrary notion. But we must own, it
now appears to us, that although the divine old bard, generally
speaking, is as correct in his prosody as he is instinctively
melodious, his lines are now and then short, or superfluous, of
a syllable or so, and his time marked only by quantity...
Here is a sample in Chaucer, from the very first page that we
have opened at random–
"The hand was knowen that the letter wrote,
And all the venom of this cursed deed,
But in what wise certainly I n’ot:"—
that is, “know not." Now on these two syllables, “what
wise," the voice lingers by reason of their natural emphasis
and thus makes the two serve the purpose of three; for in
this verse there is a syllable wanting. Mr. Clarke, however,
has made a present to the reading world, which they ought
to seize with joy. He has put an end to the old bugbear of
"difficulty" by modernising the spelling of Chaucer, without
hurting the spirit of his poetry; and if it is to be regretted
that he has put too gratuitous a faith in the far too
gratuitous conclusions of Mr. Godwin's otherwise valuable
life of the poet, his fault in that respect, as in others, is still
a fault of faith. and leaves him a character for bonhommie,
[sic] not unbecoming a recommender of childlike and loving
genius.  ...
