
236 [Horne.] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1841
accorded to poetry and prose in the Scottish dialect; or
whether on account of certain passages which in the present
state of refinement appear offensive to a degree that the good
folks of Chaucer's time, as well as the poet himself, could
never have contemplated, it is not necessary to determine.
Such an antipathy to the study of his language does exist;
and-while we, curiously enough, find Chaucer sometimes
apologizing, with meek humility and gentilesse, for using
some expressions which are now in common use, but which
were considered very improper in his day-it is undeniable
that various passages and expressions occur here and there,
[p. viii] in his works, which are calculated to startle a modern reader,
and make him doubt his eyes. Howbeit, this great fact is
sufficiently apparent,–that Chaucer is a poet, and a founder
of the language of his country; (taking rank as such, with
Homer and with Dante, and being the worthy forefather of
Shakespeare, Spenser, and Milton;) whose poetry is compara¬
tively unread and unknown even in his own country. The
simple statement of such a fact will sufficiently explain the
feeling which, in all sincerity and reverent admiration, has
prompted those who have united in this present undertaking.
From what has been said, it will be readily apprehended,
that this attempt at a translation, or transfusion, of Chaucer
into modern English, is by no means intended for the reading
of those, who, being learned in the black letter, or familiar
with the dialect of the period, can and do read the great poet
with facility and delight. It is expressly intended for all
that vast majority of our countrymen, and of foreigners
acquainted with the English and English literature, who
[p. ix] are unable to do this; and who, either from indisposition,
or the want of sufficient leisure, have never given the study
requisite for a right appreciation of the author's meaning,
but who, at the same time, having a genuine love for noble
poetry, would rejoice to find such labours superseded by a
faithful version of the great poet, bereft of his obsolete dialect.
The project has already received demonstration of the utmost
sympathy from many high quarters at home and abroad,
while the work was going through the press; and we have
at present only met with one individual of literary eminence
[Landor, q.v. below, 1841], who boldly declared, that he still
wished "to keep Chaucer for himself and a few friends."
The grand obstacle to be surmounted in reading Chaucer
