
1837] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Hippisley.] 217
[p. 133] The difference between the earlier poems of Chaucer, and
his "Canterbury Pilgrimage," as regards the portraiture of
manners, consists in this:–that, in the former, the tastes,
habits, and opinions of the court are represented to us: in
the latter, the habits of middle and low life. The total change
of theme, spirit, and style, observable in the general prologue,
and in the comic portions of Chaucer's principal and later
[p. 139] works, is perhaps to be attributed to his political disgraces,
by which he must necessarily have been estranged from the
court, in which many of his earlier years had been spent, and
re-united in habits and interests with those classes of society
in which his birth and parentage seem originally to have
placed him.
[p. 180] [Chapter V.] In the choice of the occasion; in the
variety and delicate discrimination of the characters, and
in the vivacity and dramatic effect with which the whole
plot is conducted; in all these respects, Boccaccio, when com¬
pared with Chaucer, is but a mere shadow. As a lively and
agreeable fabulist, the Italian, especially in his serious tales,
has the advantage. Prolixity, a fault common to all our old
poets, is one of the principal blemishes of Chaucer's serious
productions.  ...
[p. 200] The interest to be derived from the prose works of Chaucer
is twofold; first, as they illustrate his own life, or afford a
comment on his poetry; secondly, as they throw a light upon
the spirit and taste of the age.
[There is a long and appreciative review of Hippisley in the Gentleman's Magazine,
March 1839, new series, vol. xi, pp. 278-9, q. v. below.]
1837. Hunt, James Henry Leigh. Blue Stocking Revels; or the Feast
of the Violets. Canto III. Of the supper that Apollo gave his
Visitors and with what sort of spectacle and of after Course he
amazed them, [in] The Monthly Repository, 1837, new ser., vol. i,
p. 53. (Poetical Works, Boston, 1866, vol. i, pp. 276-7.)
Then Petrarch appear'd
. . . . . . . . .
Him follow’d, still modestly keeping behind,
. . . . . . . . .
Boccaccio, with faces a martyr might bless,
Griselda’s among them, the patient excess.
Her look was the sweetest that never knew laughter;
And backward she turn'd tow'rds the shape that came after,
