
1835] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 201
la vie, et l'autre vint à son intencion.’ It is indeed a piteous
story, but if I translate it I think I shall make it somewhat
different and somewhat shorter. But it is a long job, and the
'Romaunt de la Rose' I found a somewhat tedious under¬
taking....
[The writer recites a spurious verse, and asks who com¬
posed it :]
"By my troth, I know not who composed it.... Let him
translate the beautiful Romance of “Le Chevalier au Lion,"
which is making such a coil even now. I showed my copy of
it to a gallant high German knight, who was lately travelling
in these parts, one Master Hartman von der Oue (what out¬
landish names they have in the countries over sea), and he
was so greatly charmed with it, that he straightways made a
copy thereof, and is going incontinent to turn it into his
mother tongue. You shall read a bit of the French poem; it
is a dainty work, by my faith."
The glorious old bard reached down a huge folio from the
shelves which we have already described: and, like all lovers
of poetry, himself read the passages which he had proposed I
should have read. While he was turning over the leaves of
the manuscript, a slip of paper fell from it.... I found that
Chaucer himself had commenced the task he so earnestly
recommended to another. By his permission, I read the few
lines which he had already executed: they were from the com¬
mencement of the Poem*.
Almightie God that made mankyn,
He schilde his servandes out of syn,
And mayntene tham, with might and mayne
That herkens Swayne [sic] and Gawayne:
Thai war knightes of the tabyl rownde,
Tharfore listens a lytel stownde.
[And so for 26 lines further. The dreamer then awakes.]
* Is this the long lost “Book of the Lion"?—W. I. T.
1835. Wordsworth, William. Postscript to the Poetical Works. (Prose
Works, 2 vols., 1896, vol. ii, p. 364.)
How agreeable to picture to one's self, as has been done by
poets and romance-writers, from Chaucer down to Goldsmith,
a man devoted to his ministerial office, with not a wish or a
thought ranging beyond the circuit of its cares!
