
1837] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Hippisley.] 215
[p. 55] But in the interval which had elapsed between the days of
"Old Dan Geffrey, in whose gentle spright
The pure well-head of poetry did dwell,"
and those of his illustrious successor, who thus characterises
him, the innovations which Verstegan and Skinner charge
solely upon Chaucer, had been so far increased, that his
language had become obsolete; and the adoption of it by
Spenser is only to be justified, on the ground of its being in
harmony with his theme.  ...
[From Spenser to the present day, only Cowley of English
poets did not imitate or extol Chaucer. Spenser’s indebtedness
to Chaucer is here pointed out in detail.]
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. 58] Judging from Spenser's imitations of Chaucer, we might
conclude that his favourite works were The Dutchesse, The
Parliament of Fowles, and The Squier's Tale: but, perhaps,
(as also in the case of Milton's well-known and pathetic
allusion to the latter poem) these imitations are rather to
be received as evidence of the general admiration of Spenser
[p. 59] for the works of his predecessor, than of his partiality for
any particular passages.  ... It seems, that during the life¬
time of Spenser... the poetical character of Chaucer was
rather viewed in reference to his pathetic, than to his comic
powers.  ...
[p. 60] Amongst the pathetic poems, the Knight’s Tale, and the
"Troilus and Cresseide" have always maintained a prece¬
dency. The latter especially seems to have been a favourite
in the age of Spenser. Puttenham and Sidney, the former
in his Art of Poetrie, the latter in his Defence of Poesie,
both select this work as especially worthy of praise: and
Sidney indeed scarcely mentions any other. With Beaumont
also this was a favourite work. Shakspeare, although there
can scarcely exist any doubt that he was an admirer of the
beauties of this work, has, in the plot of his Midsummer
Night's Dream, given us yet clearer proof of his acquaintance
with the Knight's Tale.  ...
[The Fairies of Chaucer, Spenser and Shakespeare.]
[p. 72] From the days of Shakspeare, the comic powers of Chaucer
have been the constant theme of admiration both with critics
and poets. In allegorical description he may have been
excelled by Spenser, in pathos by Shakspeare, in sublimity by
Milton; but in true comic humour, and more especially in the
