
206 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1836
1836. Southey, Robert. Sketch of the Progress of English Poetry from
Chaucer to Cowper, [in] The Works of William Cowper, with a
life of the author by the editor, Robert Southey, 1835-7, 15 vols.,
vol. ii, 1836, pp. 114-121, 134-5, 148-9, 177.
[vol. ii,
p. 114]
The first reformation which it [vernacular poetry] under¬
went was to free it from some gratuitous difficulties, and divest
it of the cumbrous ornaments with which it had been over¬
loaded. Chaucer, who is deservedly accounted the Father of
English Poetry, effected this...
[p.115] Father Chaucer, throwing off all trammels, simplified our
verse. Nature had given him the ear and the eye and the
imagination of a poet; and his diction was such as that of all
great poets has ever been, and ever will be, in all countries,—
neither cramped by pedantic rules... nor drooping for want
of strength, but rising and falling with the subject, and always
suited to it.
The seven-lined stanza of his Troilus and Cresseide [foot¬
note, quoting Sidney's praise in the Defence of Poesy] was
adopted from the Provenceal [sic] poets. I know not whether
he had any example of the ten-syllable couplet in the poets of
France, Provence, and Italy, but the Hermit of Hampole,
Richard Rolle,... had shown him the way in this. That
the one form of verse was, in his judgement, as well fitted for
grave and lofty subjects as the other, is certain, for in such
subjects he has employed them both: but it appears that the
couplet took its character in common opinion from his lighter
pieces, and was supposed to be adapted for nothing better.
And while the “Troilus verse," as King James called it,
obtained the dignified title of Rhythm Royal, [footnote,
quoting Puttenham, Art of English Poetry, on the metre of
[p. 116] Troilus and “riding rhyme"] the strain in which the knight
related his tale of Palamon and Arcite, and in which “ the
story of Cambuscan bold" had been pitched, was degraded
in public estimation, and distinguished by the contemptuous
term of riding rhymes. [Footnote: Perhaps Shakespeare
alludes to this appellation when he describes a still more
familiar kind of measure, as the "right butter-woman's rate
to market."]
It is a disputed question whether Chaucer's verses be
rhythmical or metrical. I believe them to have been written
[p. 117] rhythmically, upon the same principle on which Coleridge
composed his beautiful fragment of Christabel,—that the
number of beats, or accentuated syllables in every line should
