
1870] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 25
skill into the texture, and help to give richness and brilliancy
to the new fabric. On closer examination, however, the
range and minuteness of Chaucer's learning becomes clearly
apparent. He employed materials derived from all existing
literatures home and foreign; not only the early English
chronicles and stories, the Norman-French romances and
fables, the new epic and lyrical poetry of Italy, and the whole
range of Latin literature, including not only the classics
proper, as well as the science and art, the history and philo¬
sophy of the time, but also Byzantine legends and brilliant
fragments of Eastern romance, that had passed into Europe
in the wake of the returning Crusaders. The adequate
illustration of Chaucer thus requires, in addition to a minute
acquaintance with the state of the language in his day, a
full knowledge of contemporary literature and history. No
single editor has as yet united these requirements. Tyrwhitt,
who studied with some care the literature and history of the
fourteenth century, was comparatively ignorant of Chaucer's
language; while recent editors, such as Mr. Wright and
Mr. Morris, who are well acquainted with Chaucer’s lan¬
guage, have attempted hardly anything in the way of literary
or historical illustration.
But the primary requirement of all expository criticism of
Chaucer is undoubtedly the full interpretation of his language.
While extended literary and historical illustration may
perhaps be regarded as critical luxuries, the first and most
essential condition of any intelligent study of his poetry is
that its obscurities of phrase and diction should as far as
[p. 35] possible be explained. There is still, however, a great deal
to be done for the elucidation of Chaucer’s language; and,
unfortunately, Mr. Morris, who of living scholars is in many
respects best qualified for the work, has confined his labours
in this direction to a revision of previous glossaries. ...
[An examination of Morris’s Glossary follows.]
[p. 40] This [comparison with Piers Plowman] points to an import¬
ant means of interpreting Chaucer’s language which has not
as yet been turned to anything like adequate account. We
refer to the critical examination of the writings of his con¬
temporaries and immediate successors. The more carefully
the early literature of the fourteenth century is studied, the
more clearly will it appear that Chaucer's additions to the
vocabulary of the language are far less numerous than is
