
14 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1870
characteristics of his genius, no English poet comes nearer
to Shakspeare.
[pp. 2, 3] [Chaucer's dramatic iusight, love of nature, wide human
interest, and felicity of expression.]
These excellences have justly made Chaucer not only the
father of English poetry, the greatest of our dramatists before
the rise of the regular drama, but one of the most delightful
and habitually read of all English poets. The many eulo-
gistic references to him by later writers both in prose and
verse, down to the close of the Elizabethan period, show how
constantly he was studied during the two centuries after his
death. In the first century we have repeated and emphatic
testimony to his pre-eminent merit by such poets as Lidgate,
Occleve, and Douglas. And in the Elizabethan age there is
a consensus of enthusiastic appreciation amongst almost all
its more distinguished critics, poets, and historians. The
list includes amongst eminent prose writers the names of
Wilson, Puttenham, Ascham, Fox, and Camden; and of
poets Sir Philip Sidney ranks Chaucer with Dante, Petrarch,
[p. 4] and Boccaccio; while Spenser avowedly adopted him as a
master, and commenced his poetic career by direct imitations
of his style. The well-known reference to
'him that left half-told
The story of Cambuscan bold,'
and the quotations from the 'Canterbury Tales' in Milton’s
prose writings, show that Chaucer was not forgotten amidst
the distractions of the Parliamentary conflict and the civil
war. Dryden, again, did his utmost to popularise the more
striking of the 'Canterbury Tales,' and has left, perhaps, the
best critical estimate of their author we possess. During
the eighteenth century there were several elaborate attempts
to make English readers better acquainted with Chaucer,
whose language had by that time become too archaic for
the effortless enjoyment of ordinary readers. And in our
own day, notwithstanding the obstacles interposed by a
grammar and vocabulary partially obsolete, Chaucer has
reappeared in a greater number of forms, and is, perhaps,
more generally read and studied, than any of the great
Elizabethan poets except Shakspeare.
These circumstances render it the more surprising, and,
ve may add, the more discreditable to our national scholar¬
