
1872] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 37
Chaucer and Lydgate, and prose and poetry by Richard
Hampole and Walter Hylton. A volume in this collection
written about the middle of the 15th century contains poems
by Chaucer and Lydgate, and the table of contents shows
that "The Flower and the Leaf" was among them; but
unfortunately it has now disappeared. ...
[p. xiv] ... A letter by Thomas Hearne about Chaucer and the
editions of his works. [See 1707, Hearne.]
The Report is signed by the thirteen commissioners, Earl
Salisbury, etc.—besides the secretary, John Romilly.]
1872. Ruskin, John. The Eagle's Nest, Lecture III. Wise Art and
Wise Science. Works of Ruskin, Library edn., ed. E. T. Cook and
A. Wedderburn, vol. xxii, pp. 160-2.
I gave you, in a former lecture, the Skylark as a type of
mastership in music; and remembering—some of you, I
suppose, are not likely soon to forget,—the saint to whom
yesterday was dedicated. [St. Valentine] let me read you
to-day some of the prettiest English words in which our
natural feeling about such song is expressed.1
1 Footnote by editors: The Cuckow and the Nightingale. For other notes on the
birds of Chaucer, see Munera Pulveris, § 149n., vol. xvii, p. 278 n.]
"And anone, as I the day espide [to]
And held the way downe by a brook side."
[And four following stanzas. ]
You recollect, perhaps, the dispute that follows between
the cuckoo and the nightingale, and the promise which the
sweet singer makes to Chaucer for rescuing her.
"And then came the Nightingale to me [to]
The next May, if I be not affraied."
"If I be not affraied." Would she not put the "if" more
timidly now, in making the same promise to any of you,
or in asking for the judgment between her and her enemy,
which was to be passed, do you remember, on this very day
of the year, so many years ago, and within eight miles of
this very spot?
"And this shall be without any Nay" [to]
"And there she sate, and sang upon that tree
'Terme of life Love hath withheld me'
So loud, that I with that song awoke."
