
22 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1870
Mr. Wright's plan, and adopted the text he had selected.
But the publication of the Chaucer Society six-text edition
of the 'Prologue' and 'Knight's Tale' has very much
destroyed the force of Mr. Wright's plea in favour of adhering
strictly to a single text. A comparison of the Harleian
text with the six now publishing by the Society, will show
that there are numberless points of grammar, metre, or sense
in which it may be improved by careful collation, and that
the old plan must still be followed before we can hope to
secure a satisfactory and authoritative text. We propose to
illustrate this necessity more in detail by a comparison of
Mr. Morris's text—the best form of the Harleian—with the
six other texts now available for critical collation. Mean¬
while, to complete the account of texts, we must refer for
a moment to the edition of Chaucer's Poetical Works, edited
by Mr. Robert Bell for the Annotated Edition of the English
Poets. As we have said, Mr. Bell and his colleague Mr.
Jephson adopt the Harleian text, making alterations here and
there, which are not, however, in all cases improvements,
They are, however, fairly entitled to the credit of having
attempted almost for the first time to edit the minor poems,
as well as of having given throughout a number of useful
miscellaneous notes. ...
p. 15] The latest text of Chaucer's poetical works, that edited by
Mr. Morris, and substituted for Tyrwhitt's in the new issue of
the Aldine Series, is undoubtedly also the best. Mr. Morris
is one of our most accurate and accomplished early English
scholars, and no better editor of a mediæval text could possibly
be found. After examining several manuscripts of the
'Canterbury Tales,' he agreed with Mr. Wright in thinking
the Harleian text the best, and it has accordingly been
selected and faithfully adhered to throughout. Clerical
errors and corrupt readings were corrected by collation with
other manuscripts, especially the Lansdowne, and a careful
examination of Mr. Morris's text will show how painstaking
he has been in this part of his work. The rest of the poems
have been edited from the manuscripts where they existed,
and the result is the best text of Chaucer that has yet appeared.
Good as it is, however, we hope to show that something better
may be produced by turning to full account the valuable
materials the Chaucer Society are providing for critical use.
As we have seen, Mr. Morris gives what all recent editors have
