
1870] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 9
granted as the best that ever was or ever could be for him,
has left us such a picture of contemporary life as no man ever
painted. 'A perpetual fountain of good sense,' Dryden calls
him, yes, and of good humor, too, and wholesome thought.
. . . . . . . . . .
It is not the finding of a thing, but the making something
out of it after it is found, that is of consequence. Accord¬
ingly, Chaucer, like Shakespeare, invented almost nothing.
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. 322] Chaucer ... drew from the South a certain airiness of
sentiment and expression, a felicity of phrase, and an elegance
of turn hitherto unprecedented and hardly yet matched in
our literature, but all the while kept firm hold of his native
soundness of understanding, and that genial humour which
seems to be the proper element of worldly wisdom. With
Dante, life represented the passage of the soul from a state
of nature to a state of grace; ... With Chaucer, life is a
pilgrimage, but only that his eye may be delighted with the
varieties of costume and character. There are good morals
to be found in Chaucer, but they are always incidental.
With Dante the main question is the saving of the soul, with
Chaucer it is the conduct of life.
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. 324-5] Chaucer is the first who broke away from the dreary
traditional style, and gave not merely stories, but lively
pictures of real life as the ever-renewed substance of poetry.
He was a reformer, too, not only in literature, but in morals.
But as in the former his exquisite tact saved him from all
eccentricity, so in the latter the pervading sweetness of his
nature could never be betrayed into harshness and invective.
... There is no touch of cynicism in all he wrote.
Dante's brush seems sometimes to have been smeared with
the burning pitch of his own fiery lake. Chaucer's pencil is
dipped in the cheerful colour-box of the old illuminators, and
he has their patient delicacy of touch, with a freedom far
beyond their somewhat mechanic brilliancy.
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. 331] It is not in detached passages that his charm lies, but in
the entirety of expression and the cumulative effect of many
[p. 332] particulars working towards a common end. ... For we
should always bear in mind that the really great writer
is great in the mass, and is to be tested less by his cleverness
