
20 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1870
[Then follow comments and quotations on Morell and Urry's
views of Chaucer’s versification.]
[p.12] We can only glance at Dr. Morell’s scheme of illustration,
which is as judicious and complete as his method of dealing
with the text. It includes brief notes at the foot of the page,
explaining archaic words, phrases, and allusions, and often
containing parallel passages from the poets ancient and
modern, and a commentary in the shape of an appendix
explaining at greater length the historical allusions of the
text, as well as its references to contemporary life and
manners. The explanation of obsolete words is sometimes
inaccurate, and the etymology often erroneous; but con¬
sidering the low state of English philology at the time, this
part of the work is well done, and generally, both in con¬
ception and execution, the volume is well entitled to Tyr¬
whitt’s praise of 'being infinitely preferable to any of those
that preceded it.' It may indeed even yet be favourably
compared with some that have followed it, and that have
had the good fortune to become better known.
Tyrwhitt comes next as an editor of Chaucer, and his
edition of the 'Canterbury Tales' is so well known that it
is needless to specify its merits and defects in detail. In
our judgment, the merits of the work far outweigh its defects,
although in the present state of our knowledge the text
must no doubt be regarded as seriously defective. Still on
the whole Tyrwhitt has done more for Chaucer than any
other single editor. It is no doubt true that he was un¬
acquainted with the niceties of Chaucer’s grammar, and their
intimate connexion with the mechanism of his verse; and
[p. 13] Mr. Wright, in the introduction to his edition of the 'Canter¬
bury Tales,' has emphasized these deficiencies in somewhat
sweeping terms. But Tyrwhitt was a sagacious critic, pos¬
sessing great literary knowledge, taste, and industry; and
he brought all his powers and acquirements to the illustration
of his favourite author, often with the happiest results. ...
The next step in the history of Chaucer texts is the publi¬
cation of this manuscript—the Harleian—by Mr. Wright in
1847. This publication represents something like a revolution
in the plan of editing Chaucer, and at once raises the whole
question as to the best method of dealing with the text. At
first sight Mr. Wright seems to make out a strong case for his
own plan. After noticing that the grammatical forms of the
