
84 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1880-
loyal and loving fidelity to the minor passing suggestions of
Chaucer's text, which on all possible occasions of such com¬
parison so markedly and vividly distinguishes the work of
Shakespeare's from the work of Fletcher's hand.
[p. 218] . . . Fletcher, whom we recognise at wellnigh his worst
and weakest in Palamon’s appeal to his kinsman for a last
word, "if his heart, his worthy, manly heart ... be yet
unbroken," and in the flaccid and futile answer which fails so
signally to supply the place of the most famous and pathetic
passage in all the masterpiece of Chaucer.
[The subject is referred to again in Swinburne's later
Shakespeare, written 1905, pub. 1909, p. 81. An interesting
Griselda reference occurs in that edition on p. 70, wherein the
submissive and obedient Cordelia is thus spoken of:
"It is almost suggestive of something almost like a reversion
to the mean mediaeval type of Griselda: of an ethical and
spiritual subsidence or descent from Shakespeare’s humanity
to Chaucer's." Other reference, p. 10.]
1880. Swinburne, A. C. Short Notes on English Poets, Chaucer,
Spenser, the Sonnets of Shakespeare, Milton, [in] The Fortnightly
Review, London, 1880, p. 708.
1880. Unknown. Chaucer and his Circle [in] The Catholic World,
August 1880, vol. xxxi, pp. 695-710.
[p. 686] Chaucer’s eternal freshness is a relief after the faded
studio properties of the modern school [Morris, Swinburne
and Rossetti], and a ramble in his fields,
"All full of freshest flowers, white and red,"
the best remedy for the poetical scarlet-fever that has
afflicted us. . . .
[p. 697] An impartial examination of the portions ot his writings
which induced even the amiable Miss Mitford to applaud
him for his Protestant tendencies will show that Chaucer,
like all true Catholics of his time, saw that pride and luxury
sloth and simony, hiding under the desecrated cloak of
religion, were separating the threads of the sacred garment. ...
Like most poets, Chaucer demanded more of the ideal
from the world than he was willing to give himself. His
airy ridicule often played about abuses more for wanton¬
ness than from any desire to mend them. Vice was
picturesque, and, while deploring it, he could not help
