
1870] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 21
fourteenth century underwent a considerable change about the
middle of the fifteenth, and that copyists of this date usually
employed the language of the time rather than of the author
they are copying, he contends that the only satisfactory plan
of editing Chaucer is to select the oldest and best manuscript,
and to adhere to it faithfully throughout. The opposite plan,
which had hitherto been usually followed, he condemns
indeed in no very measured terms:—
'It is evident, therefore,' he says, 'that the plan of forming
the text of any work of the periods of which we are speaking
from a number of different manuscripts, written at different
time and different places, is the most absurd plan which it
is possible to conceive. Yet this was the method professedly
followed by Tyrwhitt in forming a text of the "Canterbury
Tales" of Chaucer.'
And after pointing out Tyrwhitt’s special disqualifications
as a student of manuscripts, he adds :—
'Under these circumstances it is clear that to form a satis¬
factory text of Chaucer, we must give up the printed editions,
and fall back upon the manuscripts; and that instead of
bundling them altogether, we must pick out one best manu¬
script which also is one of those nearest to Chaucer’s time.
The latter circumstance is absolutely necessary, if we would
reproduce the language and versification of the author. At
the same time it cannot but be acknowledged that the earliest
manuscripts might possibly be very incorrect and incomplete,
from the ignorance or negligence of the scribe who copied
it. This, however, is not the case with regard to Chaucer's
p. 14] "Canterbury Tales." The Harleian manuscript, No. 7334,
is by far the best manuscript of Chaucer's "Canterbury
Tales" that I have yet examined, in regard both to antiquity
and correctness. The handwriting is one which would at
first sight be taken by an experienced scholar for that of the
latter part of the fourteenth century, and it must have been
written within a few years after 1400, and therefore soon
after Chaucer's death and the publication of the "Canterbury
Tales." Its language has very little, if any, appearance of
local dialect; and the text is in general extremely good, the
variations from Tyrwhitt being usually for the better.'
This reasoning seems, as we have said, sufficiently conclu¬
sive, and it has very naturally determined the course of sub¬
sequent editors, both Mr. Bell and Mr. Morris having followed
