
68 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1879
complexions, abundant humours; the red fox, for instance, by
abundance of red choler, black boars by abundance of melan¬
choly, and bids him "take a laxative" and believe in Cato.
But Chanticleer answers with the well-known case given by
Cicero, the dreams of Kenelm, Scipio, Daniel, Joseph, Pharaoh,
Cresus, Andromache, and gets the best of the argument. His
own dream is a true one. ... On the whole it seems that
Chaucer believed in prophetic dreams granted by special
revelation, but not in oneiromancy as applied to ordinary
dreams.
[Next follow notes on]
[p. 145 to
p. 154]
Astrology and Alchemy.
[p. 5]
Hagiology.
I have under this head collected the allusions to Saints that
occur in Chaucer's works, independently of the Fathers,
allusions to whose writings I have collected in MS. not here
printed. [Here follow twenty-seven allusions, arranged by
poems; and then some Notes on The House of Fame; on
Troilus and Cresseyde (the puns: "Troy distroyed; Calkas
Calkelyng," in (i, 10, 11) v, 19, 20; and the blaunch fevere
of (i, 131), v, 49, and the observance of May, etc., etc.)].
1879-80. Gilman, Arthur. The Poetical Works of Chaucer, to which
are appended poems attributed to Chaucer, 3 vols., Boston, 1880.
[Gilman's edition of Chaucer is the first considerable use
made, by way of an edition, of the work of Furnivall and
the Chaucer Society. In the case of the Canterbury Tales,
the text was based on the Ellesmere MS., which was collated
with others. It was considered advisable "not to burden
the volume with the various readings." The line-numbers
of Tyrwhitt's edition are given in parentheses every fiftieth
line, and in the prose tales every tenth break in the six-text
edition is indicated. The greatest praise and thanks are
given to the Chaucer Society. The edition is also indebted
to the labours of Child, Skeat, Morris, Bradshaw and ten
Brink.
The Biography entitled The Times and the Poet is by the
editor, and is divided into sections: i. The Outer Life;
ii. The Social Life; iii. The Poet's Life; iv. The Poet's
Works; v. The Poet’s Genius. A Section On Reading
Chaucer follows with information on pronunciation, stress
and scansion. Sections on Astrological Terms and Biblical
References follow. The Tales are divided into four days'
recital.
