
1879] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 71
the innermost essence of things: that its means shall be
images addressed to the spirit; and that its prime requisite
shall be unity as a supreme condition. How does Chaucer
answer these demands?
[Quotations illustrating Chancer's philosophy.]
We have now considered Chaucer as the seer,— the crucial test
of all aesthetic criticism not formal. The second requirement
of perfect art was "images addressed to the spirit,"—that
is, pictures not merely verbal, but such as shall stand the
examination of the most searching analysis.
The knight:
Though he was worthy, he was wise [etc.]
Picture of utter hopelessness:
Have ye not sometimes seen a pallid face [etc.]
[And other examples.]
[p. 116] . . . Passing by, then, the formal art of Chaucer, what
. . . . . . . . . .
as an artist did he attempt to portray? Human life. ... For
the study of a noble manhood and a pure womanhood, for
beautiful descriptions of English landscapes, for clearness of
insight in regard to the interests of man, Chaucer is unsur¬
passed ...
1879. Ward, Sir Adolphus William. Chaucer (English Men of Letters
Series, ed. John Morley).
[Contents: Chap. I, Chaucer's Times; Chap. Il, Chaucer's
Life and Works; Chap. III, Characteristics of Chaucer and
of his Poetry; Chap. IV, Epilogue; Glossary.]
[p. 146] One very pleasing quality in Chaucer must have been his
modesty. In the course of his life this may have helped to
recommend him to patrons so many and so various, and to
make him the useful and trustworthy agent that he evidently
became for confidential missions abroad. ... To us, of course,
this quality of modesty in Chaucer makes itself principally
manifest in the opinion which he incidentally shows himself
to entertain concerning his own rank and claims as an author.
Herein, as in many other points, a contrast is noticeable
between him and the great Italian masters. ... Chaucer
again and again disclaims all boasts of perfection, or pre-
[p. 147] tensions to pre-eminence, as a poet. ... He acknowledges
as incontestable the superiority of the poets of classical
antiquity.
