
1870] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 15
ship, that no complete critical edition of Chaucer's poetical
works should yet have been produced. The reproach is one
of old standing, and many suggestions have from time to
time been made with the view of wiping it away.
[Quotation of Dr. Johnson's note on his projected edition.
[p. 5] The truth is, that until the last few years the greater part
See p.  above, also remarks on Todd.]
of Chaucer’s poetical works have never, strictly speaking,
been edited at all. 'Troilus and Cressid,' a story nearly as
long as the 'Æneid,' the 'Romaunt of the Rose,' the 'House
of Fame,' the 'Legend of Good Women,' and the minor
poems, collected and published together for the first time
by Thynne in 1532, were printed from defective and im¬
perfect manuscripts without any critical oversight or correc¬
tion; and from that time to our own day they have been
reprinted from the black-letter folios without any attempt
at systematic critical revision. The 'Canterbury Tales
have, indeed, fared somewhat better, having been more than
once carefully edited by critics in many respects well qualified
for the task. But much still remains to be done for the text
of Chaucer’s greatest work; and still more, perhaps, for the
adequate explanation of its language and allusions. Wo
have as yet no satisfactory and authoritative text even of
the' Canterbury Tales'; and the best published text, that
recently revised by Mr. Morris, to which we shall presently
refer in detail, is without note or comment of any kind.
The work which Johnson projected, and which a succession
of eminent scholars and critics have so earnestly desiderated,
still remains, therefore, to be done.
In these circumstances the formation of a Chaucer Society,
mainly for the purpose of printing the best existing manu¬
scripts of the poet's works, ought to be matter of hearty con¬
gratulation to all lovers of English literature. Our public
and private libraries are rich in Chaucer manuscripts, and
the best of these must be available for critical use before an
authoritative complete and satisfactory text of Chaucer can
be produced. But the only way of placing these manu-
scripts within the reach of English scholars is by printing
them; and, if done at all, this must obviously be the work
of a special Society. With this end in view, the Chaucer
[p. 6] Society was accordingly founded two years ago, and it is
pleasant to find the two great divisions of the Anglo-Saxon
