
1880] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 75
divine fluidity of movement, it is difficult to speak temperately.
They are irresistible, and justify all the rapture with which
his successors speak of his "gold dewdrops of speech."
Johnson misses the point entirely when he finds fault with
Dryden for ascribing to Chaucer the first refinement of our
numbers, and says that Gower can also show smooth numbers
and easy rhymes. The refinement of our numbers means
[p. 29] something far more than this. A nation may have versifiers
with smooth numbers and easy rhymes, and yet may have no
real poetry at all. Chaucer is the father of our splendid
English poetry; he is our 'well of English undefiled,' because
by the lovely charm of his movement, he makes an epoch
and founds a tradition. In Spenser, Shakespeare, Milton,
Keats, we can follow the tradition of the liquid diction, the
fluid movement of Chaucer; at one time it is his liquid diction
of which in these poets we feel the virtue, and at another
time it is his fluid movement. And the virtue is irresistible.
... I must yet find room for an example of Chaucer's
virtue. ... I feel disposed to say that a single line is enough
to show the charm of Chaucer's verse; that merely one line
like this—
'O martyr soudered1 in virginitee!'
1 The French soudé, soldered, fixed fast.
[p. 30] has a virtue of manner and movement such as we shall not
find in all the verse of romance-poetry;—but this is saying
nothing. The virtue is such as we shall not find, perhaps, in
all English poetry, outside the poets whom I have named as
the special inheritors of Chaucer's tradition. A single line,
however, is too little if we have not the strain of Chaucer's
verse well in our memory; let us take a stanza. It is from
The Prioress’s Tale, the story of the Christian child murdered
in a Jewry—
'My throte is cut unto my nekké-bone
Saidè this child, and as by way of kinde
I should have deyd, yea, longè time agone [etc.].
Wordsworth has modernised this Tale, and to feel how delicate
and evanescent is the charm of verse, we have only to read
Wordsworth’s first three lines of this stanza after Chaucer's—
'My throat is cut unto the bone, I trow,
Said this young child, and by the law of kind
I should have died, yea, many hours ago.'
