
1871] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 27
. . . But of all the colours which Chaucer loved in nature,
he loved best the harmony of white and green in one of his
favourite daisied meadows.
. . . It may be in an age when colours in art had each their
peculiar religious significance, that Chaucer, a man who had
travelled in Italy and who had himself the instinct of sym¬
bolism, had some spiritual meaning in the constant association
of these two colours of white and green. Green, the hue of
spring, signified hope, and particularly the hope of Immor¬
tality; white was the emblem, among other things, of light
and joy.
[p. 278] . . . Still dwelling on Chaucer's colour, it is curious the
number of concentrated pictures which are to be found in his
poems, pictures so sharply drawn in colour that they might
be at once painted from the description. ... One sees that,
"flashing upon the inward eye," not in outline, nor in detail,
but in colour, and that is the test whether a poet is a good
colourist or not. It is no common excellence.
... There is a splendid study of colour, unequalled in its
way in our literature, in Chaucer's picture of the cock in the
"Nun’s Priests Tale." The widow keeps in her yard a famous
stock of poultry
"In which she had a cock, hight Chaunticlere [to]
And lik the burnischt gold was his colour."
[p. 74] . . . This simple childlikeness and intensity of Chaucer ...
are the first necessity of a poetic nature, ... This is the first
of those elements of his poetry which make his landscapes
impossible to be painted.
Of two other unpaintable things the landscape is also full—
of the scent of flowers, and the songs of birds, and now and
then of the noise of water. ...
1871-89. Courthope, William J., and Elwin, Whitwell. Works of
Alexander Pope, with Intr. and Notes by Rev. W. Elwin and
W. J. Courthope.
[Vol. i.] Chaucer, p. 21. Pope's Translation from the Tales, 113.
General Criticism on, 115-122. January and May, 123.
Wyf of Bathes Prol. 155. Versatility of his genius and his
characteristics, 193. Influence of Italian poets, 190. Hous
of Fame, 187-229.
[Vol. ii] Knightes, T., pp. 63, 152. Frankeleyns T., 241, 454.
[Vol. iii.] pp. 36, 351.
