
26 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1870-
commonly supposed. He has been charged with adulterating
the English speech of his time by the wholesale importation
of foreign, and especially of Norman-French, words. In his
early translations and paraphrases from Norman-French he
occasionally, it is true, transfers words mainly for the con¬
venience of their rhymes. But with these exceptions his
importations are comparatively few. His real superiority
lies in the admirable taste and judgment displayed in the
selection of his vocabulary, the natural reflex of his keen and
exquisite sensibility to the latent significance of language.
The perfection of his art lies in his subtle insight into the
deeper meaning of words, and his power of combining them
in the most felicitous manner. He is not fond of verbal
novelties for their own sake, and his obscurities of phrase
and diction may generally therefore be explained by a
reference to the literature of the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries. The works of Gower and Lidgate, especially the
latter, are of essential service in this respect.
1870. Unknown. Report [in] First Report of the Royal Commission
on Historical Manuscripts, Appendix, London, 1870, p. 95.
Historical Documents Preserved in the Muniment Room
of Westminster Abbey. . . .
A lease from the Custos Capellæ Beatæ Mariæ to Geoffrey
Chaucer of a house on or near a place where King Henry
VII's Chapel now stands; dated 24th December, 1399.
1871. Brooke, Stopford A. The Descriptive Poetry of Chaucer, [in]
Macmillan's Magazine, London, August 1871, vol. xxiv, pp. 268-74.
[p. 269] The landscape of Chaucer is sometimes taken from the
Italian and sometimes from the French landscape. It possesses
almost always the same elements, differently mixed up in
different poems: a May morning—the greenwood, or a
garden—some clear running water—meadows covered with
flowers—some delectable place or other with an arbor laid
down with soft and fresh-cut turf. There is no sky, except in
such rapid allusions as this, "Bright was the day and blue the
firmament ;" no cloud studies; no conception of the beauty of
wild nature.
His range, therefore, is extremely limited; but within the
limits his landscape is exquisitely fresh, natural, and true in
spite of its being conventional.
