
1877] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 63
And the light of this Sun of the Spirit is divided into this
measured Iris of colours :—
I. THE LAW OF THE LORD, which is perfect, converting
the Soul. . . .
II. THE TESTIMONIES OF THE LORD, which are sure,—
making wise the simple.
These are what He has told us of His law, by the lips of
the prophets, from Enoch, the seventh from Adam, by Moses,
by Hesiod, by David, by Elijah, by Isaiah, by the Delphic
Sibyl, by Dante, by Chaucer, by Giotto. Sure testimonies
all; their witness agreeing together, making wise the simple
—that is to say, all holy and humble men of heart.
1877. Selby, Walford D. Two Chaucer Documents [in] The Academy.
Oct. 13, 1877, pp. 364-5.
[The discovery by Floyd of the conveyances passing the
quit-rent of the tenement in St. Botolph Without Aldgate, by
John and Agnes Chaucer, and Bartholomew atte Chapel and
Agnes, to Nicholas Long, and releasing to him all right of
dower; with the text of the documents. The chief points
deduced are—
1. The date of John Chaucer's death, to within a year.
2. The re-marriage of Agnes Chaucer.
3. A Chaucer seal different from any seal hitherto found.
Ou the documents see A. A. Kern: The Ancestry of Chaucer,
pp. 95, 97.]
1877. Unknown. Chaucer's Love-Poetry [in] Cornhill Magazine
March. Vol. XXXV, p. 280.
Before going further, it may be as well to point out how
very small a portion of Chaucer’s work decides the special
impression of him which now is historically transmitted from
generation to generation.
If it were possible to take away only a little more than a
tenth part of the poet’s voluminous writings, there would be
left a mass of outlandish recital having nothing whatever it
do with anything we now know of English tastes. Instead
of appearing a broad humourist, with an overpowering love of
nature, painting persons and scenes with exact reality, there
would then seem to be no English poet so artificial, so
romantic, so lackadaisical as Chaucer. His object was to give
Englishmen a literature bodily, instantly as it were, by trans¬
