
72 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1879
[p. 177] The vivacity and joyousness of Chaucer’s poetic tempera¬
ment ... show themselves in various other ways besides his
favourite manner of treating a favourite theme. They
enhance the spirit of his passages of dialogue, and add force
and freshness to his passages of description. They make
him amusingly impatient of epical lengths, abrupt in his
transitions, and anxious, with an anxiety more usually mani-
fested by readers than by writers, to come to the point, "to
the great effect," as he is wont to callit. ... And he uncon¬
sciously suggests a striking difference between himself and the
great Elizabethan epic poet who owes so much to him, when
he declines to make as long a tale of the chaff or of the straw
as of the corn, and to describe all the details of a marriage-
feast seriatim:
The fruit of every tale is for to say:
They eat and drink, and dance and sing and play. . . .
Most assuredly he can tell a story with admirable point and
[p. 178] precision, when he wishes to do so. Perhaps no better
example of his skill in this respect could be cited than the
Manciple’s Tale, with its rapid narrative, its major and
minor catastrophe, and its concise moral, ending thus:—
My son, beware, and be no author new
[and 3 following lines].
at the same time, his frequently recurring announcements
of his desire to be brief have the effect of making his narrative
appear to halt, and thus unfortunately defeat their own
purpose. An example of this may be found in the Knight's
Tale, a narrative poem of which, in contrast with its beauties,
a want of evenness is one of the chief defects. It is not
that the desire to suppress redundancies is a tendency de¬
serving anything but commendation in any writer, whether
great or small; but rather, that the art of concealing art
had not yet dawned upon Chaucer.
Closely allied to Chaucer’s liveliness and gaiety of dis¬
position, and in part springing from them, are his keen sense
of the ridiculous and the power of satire which he has at his
command. His humour has many varieties, ranging from
the refined and half-melancholy irony of the House of Fame
[p. 180] to the ready wit of the sagacious uncle of Cressid, the burl¬
esque fun of the inimitable Nun’s Priest's Tale, and the very
