
24 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1870
that house instead of an house (578), the chieftain instead of
a chieftain (1697). Sometimes by a slight change in the
form of the noun or verb, as shall not die instead of should
not (1683), taketh his leeve instead of took his leeve (359),
hearkeneth, the true imperative form, instead of hearken (985),
full of degrees instead of full of degree (1032), the noblest of the
Greeks instead of the nobles (2041).
[Pp. 16-33 are devoted to the discussion of various textual
readings,—all worthy of serious notice,—wherein the impor¬
tance of the Chaucer Society’s Six-Text points is shown.]
[p. 23] Quite as much still remains to be done for the illustration as
for the text of Chaucer’s poetical works. There are in his
writings almost innumerable points of philological, literary,'
or historical interest that require to be elucidated. Chaucer
was not only familiar with every phase of contemporary life,
but profoundly read in all existing literature. He knew by
intimate personal experience the tastes and habits, the
pursuits and recreations, the superstitions and beliefs, of all
ranks and classes amongst his own countrymen; and his
public employments had enlarged the field of his observation
so as to include almost every country in Europe. He had
seen active military service abroad, and had taken part in
splendid public ceremonials at home; had lived habitually
in courts, camps and great cities, as well as in the congenial
[p. 34] retirement of country life. The whole world of nature and
human experience was in this way mirrored in his sunny
intellect, while the higher influences of both had melted
serenely into the quiet depths of his curiously meditative
and observant mind. As a natural result there is a mellowed
fulness in his maturer delineations; a joyous animation, a
living truth, a variety and completeness of detail in his pictures
of life that obscure at first the purely literary or academical
accomplishments of his mind; or rather, perhaps, it would be
more correct to say that in his later works the learning and
knowledge of life are so fused by imaginative sympathy into
a new poetical whole, that there is at first no distinct con¬
sciousness of the separate elements. The appreciative
reader of Chaucer is so enchanted by his descriptive power
and constructive art—so carried on and absorbed in the
enjoyment of the work as a whole—that he does not pause to
notice the felicity of allusive detail, the golden threads
derived from elder looms, that are wrought with exquisite
