
1879] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 73
gross salt of the Reeve, the Miller, and one or two others. . . .
Concerning, however, Chaucer’s use of the power which he in
so large a measure possessed, viz. that of covering with ridi¬
cule the palpable vices or weaknesses of the classes or kinds
of men represented by some of his character-types, one
assertion may be made with tolerable safety. Whatever
may have been the first stimulus and the ultimate scope of
the wit and humour which he here expended, they are not
to be explained as moral indignation in disguise. And in
truth Chaucer’s merriment flows spontaneously from a
source very near the surface; he is so extremely diverting,
because he is so extremely diverted himself.
Herein, too, lies the harmlessness of Chaucer's fun. Its
harmlessness, to wit, for those who are able to read him in
something like the spirit in which he wrote.
But the realism of Chaucer is something more than exuber¬
ant love of fun and light-hearted gaiety. He is the first
great painter of character, because he is the first great
observer of it among European writers. ... More especially
with regard to the manners and ways of women, which
often, while seeming so natural to women themselves, appear
so odd to male observers, Chaucer's eye was ever on the
alert.
. . . . . . .
[p. 187] His descriptions of nature are as true as his sketches of
human character; and incidental touches in him reveal his
love of the one as unmistakably as his unflagging interest
in the study of the other. Even those May-morning exordia,
in which he was but following a fashion—faithfully observed
both by the French trouvères and by the English romances
translated from their productions and not forgotten by the
author of the earlier part of the Roman de la Rose—always
came from his hands with the freshness of natural truth. ...
For nowhere does he seem, and nowhere could he
have been, more open to the influence which he received
into himself, and which in his turn he exercised, and
exercises, upon others, than when he was in fresh contact
with nature. In this influence lies the secret of his genius;
in his poetry there is life.
[Chap. IV, 'Epilogue gives a sketch of the influence of
Chaucer.']
