
18 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1870
being long and fabulous.' The story was undoubtedly con¬
nected with the northern mythology, and abounded in
marvellous incident. And it is certainly one of the curiosities
of literary history that a story of this nature, so well-known
in the beginning of the seventeenth century that an editor,
in noticing Chaucer’s allusions to it, thinks even an outline
needless, should now have so completely perished that no
fragment of it can be recovered. ... Speight’s compact
folio, first published in 1598, again in 1602, with some im¬
provements, and a third time in 1687, with a few trifling
additions, continued to be the standard edition of Chaucer
throughout the whole of the seventeenth century. Down to
the beginning of the eighteenth century, indeed, the collected
works of our more celebrated poets generally appeared in
the folio form, and the folio belongs to the pre-critical period
of our literary history. Urry’s ambitious work, which ap¬
peared in 1721 and has the distinction of being the tallest of
all the Chaucer folios, is certainly no exception. The licen-
tious alterations of the text, in which Urry habitually in-
dulged, have simply made it perversely corrupt in every part.
The truth is that Urry, though in some respects an accom¬
plished man and a lover of our early literature, was altogether
ignorant of Chaucer’s language and versification; and the
arbitrary alterations by which he claims to have 'in a great
measure restored and perfected the text,' have in numberless
lines destroyed both the grammar and the metre, and in many
the sense as well.
[p.10] The first editor of any part of Chaucer's works who dis¬
played anything like the spirit and power of genuine criticism
was undoubtedly Dr. Thomas Morell, best remembered per¬
haps by his learned 'Thesaurus' ... Dr. Morell was, how¬
ever, an English as well as a classical scholar, having edited
Spenser, and commenced the publication of the 'Canterbury
Tales' on a thoroughly complete and satisfactory plan. The
only matter of regret is that he did not carry out his admirable
scheme and finish the work he had so well begun. The first
volume of the projected work, and we believe the only one
ever issued, appeared in 1737, and was entitled 'The Can¬
terbury Tales of Chaucer in the original, from the most
authentic manuscripts, with references to authors ancient
and modern, various readings, and explanatory notes.'
This volume contains the 'Prologue' and the 'Knight’s
