
1884] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 97
[p. 86] I do not see what literary culture our undergraduates can
possibly derive from any English writings anterior to Chau¬
cer’s. And even Chaucer, whom I sincerely and heartily
relish, is—shall I say—double-faced? He is a colossal sphinx.
We look at him from one side, and his smile is sunny and
inviting, and we hail him as one of ourselves, as indeed our
literary father. But when, by dint of patient exploration,
we have struggled around to the other side, we discover that
our so-called father is the veriest enfant perdu of all the
grossness, folly, superstition, and prattle that go by the
name of the Middle Ages.
1884. Haweis, Mrs. [M.E.]. Chaucer's Beads, A Birthday Book, Diary
and Concordance of Chaucer's Poems or Sooth Saws. London.
[Contains Forewords, pp. v-xi; Proverbs in Troilus and
Cressida, Legend of Good Women, Cuckoo and the Nightin¬
gale, The House of Fame, The Parliament of Birds, The Book
of the Duchess, Envoy à Scogan, The Ballad of Gentilesse,
The Canterbury Tales, Anelida and False Arcite, Ballad of
Good Counsel, The Complaint of Mars and Venus, Proverbs of
Chaucer, Envoy de Chaucer à Bukton; Proverbs in Romance
of the Rose (doubtful), Appendix and Index. Tyrwhitt’s
version is used because it "is the easiest in spelling, and best
suited for what is merely a small popular book." Each day
a Chaucer proverb, with literal meaning and equivalent is
given.]
a. 1884. Hazlitt, W. Carew. Offspring of Thought in Solitude, Modern
Essays, London, 1884, pp. 81, 92-93, 94, 168, 237, 272, 334.
[p. 92] So far as it is possible to form an opinion, Chaucer achieved,
while living, a more than average share of social consideration
and eminence. He married well, was a man of business and
of the world, and had a keen enjoyment of existence. But
let us not put ourselves in the situation of his contemporaries,
and suppose that he was held by them in anything drawing
near to the esteem in which we hold him, as the father of our
poetry.
[p. 93] The time is not so far distant when we were unable to
distinguish the difference between Congreve and Shakespeare,
or, if we did, awarded the palm to the more modern and
legible poet. It was after Congreve's day that people set to
thinking what authors lived before Pope, and whether the
Canterbury Tales were worth perusing in any English but
Dryden's. It is not so much to boast of that Chaucer's fame
CHAUCER CRITICISM.
