
1870] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 13
The best poetry has been done for no salary at all; but
for casual alms, as the Iliad; or bitter bread, as the Divina
Commedia. Chaucer, indeed,—"well of English undefiled"
—had salary, thirteen pounds a year and a pitcher of wine
daily; but when he was seventy years old, was borrowing
a few shillings from week to week in advance of his pension.
[With a brief note by the editors on the passage.]
[p. 29] I think the most perfect type of a true English mind in
its best possible temper, is that of Chaucer; and you will
find that, while it is for the most part full of thoughts of
beauty, pure and wild like that of an April morning,1 there
are, even in the midst of this, sometimes momentarily jesting
passages which stoop to play with evil—while the power of
listening to and enjoying the jesting of entirely gross persons,
whatever the feeling may be which permits it, afterwards
degenerates into forms of humour which render some of
quite the greatest, wisest, and most moral of English writers
now almost useless for our youth. And yet you will find that
whenever Englishmen are wholly without this instinct, their
genius is comparatively weak and restricted.
Ibid., Lecture III, The Relation of Art to Morals, Library
edn., vol. xx, p. 77.
"Never elated, while one man’s oppress’d;
Never dejected, while another's bless'd."2
I wish you also to remember these lines of Pope, and to
make yourselves entirely masters of his system of ethics;
because, putting Shakespeàre aside as rather the world’s
than ours, I hold Pope to be the most perfect representative
we have, since Chaucer, of the true English mind; and I
think the Dunciad is the most absolutely chiselled and
monumental work "exacted" in our country.
1 Footnote by editors: A reference to the first line of the Canterbury Tales: "When that
Aprile with his schowres swoote."
2 Footnote by editors: Essay on Man, iv 323-4.
1870. Unknown. Article, The Text of Chaucer [in] the Edinburgh
Review, July, 1870, No. cclxix, pp. I-45.
[p. 1] It is a national reproach that after the lapse of nearly five
hundred years we are still without a critical and illus-
trative edition of Chaucer’s poetical works. Excepting
Shakspeare, no English poet so thoroughly requires and
deserves careful editing as Chaucer; and, in the essential
