
1879] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 67
"Chaucer's Tale" (Gamelyn, which is purposely inserted
instead of Sir Thopas, as being more suitable, see Preface, p.
vi), illustrated by woodcuts from the Ellesmere MS.]
1878. Thoms, William G. Chaucer's Night-Spell, [in] Folk Lore
Record, vol. i, p. 145. [A long note on the "White Paternoster"
(Milleres Tale, Il. 297-300.)
[See a Note on the white Paternoster in Folk Lore Record, vol. ii, 1879, p. 127.]
1879. Fleay, F. G. Some Folk-Lore from Chaucer [in] Folk-Lore
Record, vol. ii, pp. 135, 136, 145-55.
Proverbs.
p. 136] It is hard to draw a line as to these, so as to determine
what are pithy sayings of Chaucer's own and what are genuine
folk-words which ought to be extracted here. I have tried to
err on the side of omission rather than risk inserting what
might mislead future investigators.
[Here follows a list of 89 proverbs, with references to Bell’s
edition; those in parentheses are to Morris's edition.]
Dreams.
Dreams play so important a part in Chaucer's writings, as
to demand a separate notice. Nearly every poem of his which
has a personal reference to himself or his patrons is written
under the form of a dream. 1. The Romaunt of the Rose;
2. Chaucer's Dream; 3. The death of the Duchess; 4. The
House of Fame; 5. The Assembly of Birds; 6. The Legend
of Good Women—are all dreams ... In all these poems a
regular sequence can be traced if they be read chronologically;
in the references to May, to Scipio's dream, to Valentine's
day, to the song of birds, to the causes of dreaming, &c., &c.
But this could only be propery displayed in a commentery on
the passages referred to.
In Troylus there are many references to dreams. Cryseide
has dreamed thrice of Pandarus ... Pandarus gives his
opinions on the matter as Chaucer does in the House of Fame.
"They mean nothing" says he "they proceed of melancholy.
... Nevertheless Troylus has true dreams of the boar Diomed
(vi, 40, 47), and Chaucer had not yet adopted Pandar's
scepticism. In the Canterbury Tales the notices of dreams are
much fewer. ... In the Nun’s Priest's we have Chaucer's fullest
statement on the matter. Chanticleer dreams of the fox, but
Partelet tells him dreams are vanity engendered of repletions,
