
48 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1873-
incessantly. ... In a sense, ordinary persons now alive
may be said to have overtaken him, just as extraordinary
persons have far outstripped him. In the early dawn of English
poetry it required a man of the highest genius to feel what
nearly everybody now feels, and to put the feeling into words
which have almost passed into commonplace, and which would
indeed have done so but for the musical and cunning fashion
in which they are arranged. ... In a word, it is the childhood
of poetry. ... Nor is it nature only that he treats in this
childish, simple, superficial, non-artificial way. Men and
women, and all that men and women do, say, eat, drink, and
wear, he views and describes in the same plain, matter-of-
fact, exact, truthful fashion. Who are they? Where do they
come from? What are their names? [Chaucer's prolixity
typical of childhood.] Neither must it be supposed, in
anticipation of the criticism of later times . . . that he is so
long-winded ... from the very depth and subtlety of his
art, and from a conviction that this is the only way of making
people see the things you want them to see. For it is not
the only way, nor yet the best way. Indeed, it is the worst
and lowest way of all the ways that do achieve the object. It
is the earliest way, the childish way; and Chaucer employed
it because he knew no other. ...
1873. Unknown. [Article] in Manchester Examiner and Times,
Manchester, March 7, 1873,
[Supports Dr. Furnivall’s plea for the Chaucer Society.]
1873. Unknown. Leading Article, [in] Daily News, London, Nov. 20,
1873, p. 5, cols. 1 and 2.
[A long article on Dr. Furnivall’s appeal for subscriptions to
the Early English Text and Chaucer Societies.]
1874. Bascom, John. Philosophy of English Literature, New York,
1874, pp. 28-35 [The Canterbury Tales in their social relations];
40-42 [Female types in Chaucer's times]; 43, 46, 47, 51-64.
1874. Bradshaw, Henry. [in] The Preface to "The Geste Hystoriale,"
E.E.T. Soc. 1874, p. xi.
There is ample evidence of the popularity of Chaucer in
Scotland in the latter half of the fifteenth century; several
of his smaller poems are only known to us from Scotch copies
of them, and one indeed is among the earliest productions of
the Edinburgh press
