
16 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1870
race united in this effort to illustrate the genius and honour
the memory of its first great poet and dramatist. The
Society was set on foot by Mr. F. J. Furnivall, to whose
philological zeal and literary industry students of early
English are already so much indebted. But, as he himself
tells us, it was established very much at the instance of
Professor Child, of Harvard University. ... In the words
of the original prospectus the Society was founded 'to do
honour to Chaucer, and to let the lovers and students of his
works see how far the best unpublished manuscripts differ
from the printed texts.' . . .
The proposal, then, is to begin with "The Canterbury
Tales," and give of them (in parallel columns in royal 4to)
six of the best unprinted manuscripts known, and to add in
another quarto the next best manuscripts if 300 subscribers
join the Society.'
This excellent plan has so far been carried out with com¬
mendable diligence and fidelity. Early in 1869, the first
part of the six-text edition, containing the 'Prologue' and
the 'Knight’s Tale,' was issued in the two forms of separate
octavo texts, and of all the texts together in a six-columned
oblong folio. All the texts are handsomely printed, and, as
we can testify from experience, the oblong folio is extremely
convenient for collocation and reference. Great care, more-
over, appears to have been taken in printing the texts so as
to render them as accurate transcripts of the manuscript as
possible.
[Account of Chaucer Society Aims and Publications.
Value of the latter to students. Only seventy subscribers
in England, and thirty in the United States. Readers
recommended to subscribe.]
[p. 8] From what we have said it will be seen that the publi¬
cations of the Chaucer Society are preparing the way for a
complete edition of Chaucer’s works in the twofold direction
of text and commentary. The requirements of such an
edition are an authoritative text based on a comparison of
the best manuscripts, and an adequate explanation in the
shape of notes and commentary of Chaucer's learning and
literary studies, his allusions, language and versification.
The first point is the text; and, in order to estimate fairly
the work the Chaucer Society is doing in this respect, it is
necessary to glance at the history of the printed texts down
