
74 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1879-
1879. Wood, Henry. Chaucer's Influence upon King James I of
Scotland as poet. Halle, 1879 (Leipsiger dissertation).
1880. Arnold, Matthew, [in] Essays in Criticism, second series, 1891,
pp. 26-34, Essay on "The Study of Poetry" published in 1880 as
the General Introduction to The English Poets, edited by
T. H. Ward.
[p. 26] But in the fourteenth century there comes an Englishman
nourished on this poetry [French romance-poetry], taught his
trade by this poetry, getting words, rhyme, metre from this
poetry; for even of that stanza which the Italians used, and
which Chaucer derived immediately from the Italians, the basis
and suggestion was probably given in France. Chaucer (I
have already named him) fascinated his contemporaries, but so
too did Christian of Troyes and Wolfram of Eschenbach.
[p. 27] Chaucer's power of fascination, however, is enduring; his
poetical importance does not need the assistance of the
historic estimate; it is real. He is a genuine source of joy
and strength, which is flowing still for us and will flow
always. He will be read, as time goes on, far more generally
than he is read now. His language is a cause of difficulty to
us, but so also, and I think in quite as great a degree, is the
language of Burns. In Chaucer's case, as in that of Burns, it
is a difficulty to be unhesitatingly accepted and overcome.
If we ask ourselves wherein consists the immense
superiority of Chaucer's poetry over the romance poetry—why
it is that in passing from this to Chaucer we suddenly feel
ourselves to be in another world, we shall find that his
superiority is both in the substance of his poetry and in the
style of his poetry. His superiority in substance is given by
his large, free, simple, clear yet kindly view of human life,—
so unlike the total want, in the romance-poets, of all intelli¬
[p. 28] gent command of it. Chaucer has not their helplessness; he
has gained the power to survey the world from a central, a
truly human point of view. We have only to call to mind
the Prologue of The Canterbury Tales. The right comment
upon it is Dryden’s 'It is sufficient to say, according to the
proverb, that here is God’s plenty.' And again: 'Here is a
perpetual fountain of good sense.' It is by a large, free,
sound representation of things, that poetry, this high criticism
of life, has truth of substance.
Of his style and manner, if we think first of the romance-
poetry and then of Chaucer’s divine liquidness of diction, his
