
1870] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 11
description of it that is the main object. His picturesque bits
are incidental to the story, glimpsed in passing; they never
stop the way. His key is so low that his high lights are never
obtrusive.
[p. 356] Chaucer never shows any signs of effort, and it is a main
. . . . . . . . . 
proof of his excellence that he can be so inadequately sampled
by detached passages—by single lines taken away from the
connection in which they contribute to the general effect
He has that continuity of thought, that evenly prolonged
power, and that delightful equanimity, which characterise
the higher orders of mind. There is something in him of the
disinterestedness that made the Greeks masters in art. His
[p. 357] phrase is never importunate. His simplicity is that of
elegance, not of poverty. The quiet unconcern with which he
says his best things is peculiar to him among English poets,
though Goldsmith, Addison, and Thackeray have approached
it in prose.
. . . . . . . . . .
When Chaucer describes anything, it is commonly by one
of those simple and obvious epithets or qualities that are so
easy to miss. Is it a woman? He tells us she is fresh, that
she has glad eyes. ... Sometimes he describes amply by the
merest hint, as where the Friar, before setting himself softly
down, drives away the cat. We know without need of more
words that he has chosen the snuggest corner.
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. 360] Chaucer seems to me to have been one of the most purely
[p. 361] original of poets, as much so in respect of the world that is
about us as Dante in respect of that which is within us.
There had been nothing like him before, there has been
nothing since. He is original, not in the sense that he thinks
and says what nobody ever thought and said before, and what
nobody can ever think and say again, but because he is always
natural; because, if not always absolutely new, he is always
delightfully fresh, because he sets before us the world as it
honestly appeared to Geoffrey Chaucer, and not a world as it
seemed proper to certain people that it ought to appear.
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. 365] In spite of some external stains, which those who have
studied the influence of manners will easily account for
without imputing them to any moral depravity, we feel that
