
10 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1870
in the elaboration of parts than by that reach of mind which
is incapable of random effort, which selects, arranges, com¬
bines, rejects, denies itself the cheap triumph of immediate
effects, because it is absorbed by the controlling charm of
proportion and unity.
[p. 336] One of the world’s three or four great storytellers, he was
. . . . . . . . . .
also one of the best versifiers that ever made English trip and
sing with a gaiety that seems careless, but where every foot
beats time to the tune of the thought. By the skilful arrange¬
ment of his pauses he evaded the monotony of the couplet,
and gave to the rhymed pentameter, which he made our
heroic measure, something of the architectural repose of
blank verse. He found our language lumpish, stiff, unwilling,
too apt to speak Saxonly in grouty monosyllables; he left it
enriched with the longer measure of the Italian and Provençal
poets.
[p. 337] [He first made our language easy] and to that extent
. . . . . . . . . .
modern, so that Spenser, two hundred years later, studied
his method and called him master. He first wrote English;
and it was a feeling of this, I suspect, that made it fashionable
in Elizabeth’s day to 'talk pure Chaucer.'
[p. 353] [Chaucer is a great narrative poet.] The power of diffusion
. . . . . . . . . .
without being diffuse would seem to be the highest merit of
narration, giving it that easy flow which is so delightful.
Chaucer's descriptive style is remarkable for its lowness of
tone—for that combination of energy with simplicity which
is among the rarest gifts in literature. Perhaps all is said in
saying that he has style at all, for that consists mainly in the
absence of undue emphasis and exaggeration, in the clear
uniform pitch which penetrates our interest and retains it,
where mere loudness would only disturb and irritate.
Not that Chaucer cannot be intense, too, on occasion; but
it is with a quiet intensity of his own, that comes in as it
were by accident. . . .
Pandarus, looking as Troïlus,
'Took up a light and found his countenance
As for to look upon an old romance.'
With Chaucer it is always the thing itself and not the
