
1881] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 87
1881. Grant, Charles. The Fairy Land of Shakespeare [in] Gentleman's
Magazine, London, April, 1881, vol. ccl, p. 434.
Both in the Decameron and The Canterbury Tales we
find the same delight in the facts of life, the same clear eye
for realistic detail, which distinguished the English drama
of the Elizabethan age. ... But the interest which was
awakened by the manners and actions of men was afterwards
concentrated on their characters and passions. We find in
Boccaccio, and still more frequently in Chaucer, many traces
of a personal leaning towards the later manner. The descrip¬
tion of the pilgrims, the quarrel between the Reeve and the
Miller, the Wife of Bath’s Prologue, and, indeed, most of
the incidents by the way, are conceived in the spirit of the
Elizabethan dramatists.
1881. Haweis, Mrs. H. R. Chaucer for Schools. London, 1881.
[Contents:—Forewords. Glimpses in Chaucer. Accent of
Chaucer. Table of Historical Events. Principal Authorities
Consulted. Chaucer the Tale-teller:—Chaucer's Time, Work,
Home, London, Appearance, Court Life, Position, Prosperity,
Adversity, Politics, Life-work, Speech. Canterbury Tales:—
Chaucer's Pilgrims, Chaucer’s Prologue, The Knight’s Tale,
The Clerk’s Tale, The Monk’s Tale, The Nun's Priest's
Tale, The Man of Law’s Tale, The Pardoner's Tale. Minor
Poems:—Good Counsel of Chaucer, A Balade of Gentilnesse,
Two Rondeaux, Proverbs of Chaucer, Virelai, Complaint of
Chaucer to his Purse. Fragments:—The Daisy, A Vision of
a Garden, The Sea-Fight, Antony and Cleopatra.]
1881. Kelly, E. R. (editor) Kelly's Directory of Nottinghamshire,
Leicestershire and Rutland and Derbyshire, fifth edition, London,
1881. Under Leicestershire, p. 504, col. i.
Castle Donington.
[p. 503,
There was anciently a castle on the north-east side of the
col. 2]
town, of which some remains still exist . . . it was built
[p. 504] by Henry Laci, Earl of Lincoln (who died in 1310): Clark,
in his "Riches of Chaucer," says it was once the residence
of that poet, being presented to him for his life by his brother-
in-law "John of Gaunt." . . . The deer park embraces
400 acres of romantic scenery; the oak trees are a great
attraction, one "Chaucer's Oak" being 44 ft. girth, at a
height of 12 ft. from the ground.
[These remarks about Chaucer first occur in this edition,
not in any earlier one (1848 ff.). They are identical in the
