
1880] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 77
this high seriousness. Homer's criticism of life has it,
Dante's has it, Shakespeare's has it. It is this chiefty
which gives to our spirits what they can rest upon; and with
the increasing demands of our modern ages upon poetry, this
virtue of giving us what we can rest upon will be more and
more highly esteemed. A voice from the slums of Paris, fifty
or sixty years after Chaucer, the voice of poor Villon out of
his life of riot and crime, has at its happy moments (as, for
instance, in the last stanza of La Belle Heaulmière) more of
this important poetic virtue of seriousness than all the pro¬
ductions of Chaucer. But its apparition in Villon, and in
men like Villon, is fitful; the greatness of the great poets,
the power of their criticism of life, is that their virtue is
sustained.
[p. 35] The age of Dryden, together with our whole eighteenth
century which followed it, sincerely believed itself to have
produced poetical classics of its own, and even to have made
advance, in poetry, beyond all its predecessors. Dryden
regards as not seriously disputable the opinion 'that the
sweetness of English verse was never understood or practised
by our fathers.'1 Cowley could see nothing at all in Chaucer's
[1 [Note added by Dr. Furnivall on this passage]. We must recollect that, till
Tyrwhitt, no decent edition of the Canterbury Tales was accessible, and till Richard
Morris, none of the Minor Poems. So long as printers and editors disregarded
Chaucer's final e and printed as his, pieces that he never wrote, it was impossible
for any readers to appreciate his poetic powers.—F. J. F.]
poetry. Dryden heartily admired it, and, as we have seen,
praised its matter admirably; but of its exquisite manner and
movement all he can find to say is that 'there is the rude
sweetness of a Scotch tune in it, which is natural and pleasing,
though not perfect.' Addison, wishing to praise Chaucer's
numbers compares them with Dryden's own. And all through
the eighteenth century, and down even to our own times, the
stereotyped phrase of approbation for good verse found in our
early poetry has been, that it even approached the verse of
Dryden, Addison, Pope and Johnson.
[p. 49] Burns, like Chaucer, comes short of the high seriousness of
the great classics.
[p. 50] Yet we may say of Burns, as of Chaucer, that of life and
the world, as they come before him, his view is large, free,
shrewd, benignant,—truly poetic, therefore; and his manner
of rendering what he sees is to match. But we must note, at
the same time, his great difference from Chaucer. The freedom
