
1870] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 19
Tale,' a modern version of each being appended to the
original text. Tyrwhitt refers to it in terms of high but
just praise; and it appears from his reference to have been
the only part of the work that had been published. Mr.
Robert Bell, however, in his introduction to the edition of
Chaucer in the Annotated English Poets, says that 'the
"Canterbury Tales" were published in 1740 by Dr. T.
Morell;' and that this is the edition to which Mr. Tyrwhitt
gives the date of 1737.' The last part of the statement is
certainly inaccurate, as the volume of 1737 lies before us,
and is evidently that to which Tyrwhitt refers, and which
he used in preparing his own edition for the press. And
we feel convinced that the first part of Mr. Bell’s statement
is also inaccurate, and that the volume of 1737 is the only
part of Dr. Morell’s projected work that ever appeared. This
part is, however, quite sufficient to show that in undertaking
to edit Chaucer Dr. Morell took a just and comprehensive
view of the work to be done, and that he possessed many
of the higher qualities essential to its successful execution.
His plan includes minute attention both to text and com¬
mentary; and in dealing with the text 'he set out,' says
Tyrwhitt, 'upon the only rational plan, that of collating the
best manuscripts and selecting from them the genuine read¬
ings.' For this purpose he examined no fewer than fifteen
manuscripts of the 'Canterbury Tales;' and, while adopting
the best and most authoritative readings in the text, he gave
all the more important manuscript variations in the shape
of a separate textual appendix. This full and accurate
exhibition of various readings gives indeed to Dr. Morell’s
p. 11] work a more scholarly character and a higher critical value
than belongs to any other edition of the 'Prologue' and
'Knight’s Tale.' And so great is his respect for the authority
of the best manuscripts, that he sometimes gives a reading
from them, even although he does not fully understand it.
Thus in the description of the knight he was the first to
adopt the manuscript reading of the line—
'In Lettowe hadde he reysed and in Ruce.'
The previous editions had ridden, but Dr. Morell, while
mistaking its meaning, restored reysed (journeyed, travelled).
on the authority of the great majority of the ancient manu¬
scripts, and in this he has been followed by subsequent editors.
