
96 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1884
Inn, Southwark, at close of the 14th century. The characters
[The scene of the 1st Act is the exterior of the Tabard
include Sir Christopher Synge, a knight of the shire, Geoffry
Blount, the Host of the Tabard, his wife and daughter and
apprentice, two other apprentices and Hal o' the Chepe.
In Act i, sc. 3, the Pilgrims enter in twos and threes slowly
assembling, the Merchant, Clerk, Doctor of Physick, etc.,
all with appropriate music.
This opera, written for the Carl Rosa Company, was first
performed at Drury Lane, on Wednesday, April 23rd, 1884.]
1884. Ainger, Alfred. The Women of Chaucer [in] The English
Illustrated Magazine, London, vol. i, p. 733.
We have no hesitation in placing him [Chaucer] very
high in the list of those who have exalted our ideal of the
womanly character. Womanliness is, indeed, the character¬
istic feature of Chaucer's women. He uses the adjective
"womanly" very often.
It evidently conveyed a definite idea to him, and more¬
over something distinct from any other single quality of the
sex. The typical virtues of woman, in Chaucer's view, are
mainly those of the saintly order. Purity, constancy, meek¬
ness under suffering, religious resignation, these form the
staple . . .
[p. 744] Like other great humorists, Chaucer has two distinct
methods of presenting the feminine character, and obtains
many of his happiest effects by the expressed or implied
contrast between woman as she is and woman as she ought
to be . . . But for a purely humorous treatment of the female
subject there is nothing in Chaucer more admirable than the
fable of the Cock and the Fox—the Nun Priest's Tale. The
cock Chanticleer, and his wife Pertelote, are a kind of ornitho¬
logical Mr. and Mrs. Caudle—with a difference.
1884. Coote, Henry C. Article [on] Chaucer's Lollius [in] The Athe¬
næum, 1884, p. 176.
1884. Francis, H. T. The Vedabbha Jātaka translated and compared
with the 'Pardoner's Tale', Cambridge.
[A translation from the Pali of the Buddhist Birth Story
analogous to the Pardoner's Tale, with a short Introduction
and some Notes.]
1884-5. Hart, James Morgan. The College Course in English Literature,
how it may be improred [in] Trans. Modern Language Assn. of
America, Baltimore, 1886, vol. i, pp. 86, 91.
