
46 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1873
36. There are several points of philology in this tran¬
sitional French, and in Chaucer's translation, which it is
worth your patience to observe. The monkish Latin
"angelus," you see, is passing through the very unpoetical
form "angle," into "ange"; but in order to get a rhyme,
with it in that angular form, the French troubadour expands
the bird’s name, "mesange," quite arbitrarily, into "mesan¬
gel." Then Chaucer, not liking the "mes" at the beginning
of the word, changes that unscrupulously into "arch";
and gathers in, though too shortly, a lovely bit from another
place about the nightingales flying so close round Love’s
head that they strike some of the leaves off his crown of
roses; so that the English runs thus:—
"But nightingales, a full great route. ..."
[and 8 following lines, Romaunt, 906].
Now, when I first read this bit of Chaucer, without re¬
ferring to the original, I was greatly delighted to find that
there was a bird in his time called an archangel, and set to
work, with brightly hopeful industry, to find out what it
[p. 42] was. I was a little discomfited by finding that in old botany
the word only meant "dead-nettle," but was still sanguine
about my bird, till I found the French form descend, as you
have seen, into a mesangel, and finally into mésange, which
is a provincialism from μεῐον, and means, the smallest of
birds—or, specially here,—a titmouse. I have seldom had
a less expected or more ignominious fall from the clouds. ...
Ibid. Lecture III, The Dabchicks, vol. xxv, p. 81.
[A reference to ouzel in Chaucer, as the feminine of oiseau].
Ibid., Appendix, p. 134.
[Bird-names in Chaucer].
1873. Ruskin, John. Val D'Arno, Lecture V, Pax Vobiscum. Works,
of Ruskin, Library edn., ed. E. T. Cook and A. Wedderburn, 1906,
vol. xxiii, p. 71.
[The golden florin of Florence]. It is the coin which
Chaucer takes for the best representation of beautiful money
in the Pardoner’s Tale,1 this, in his judgment, is the fairest
mask of Death.
1 Footnote by editors, quoting Pardoneres T., 770 seq.
Ibid., Lecture VIII, Franchise, Library edn., vol. xxiii, p. 117.
[Quotation ot Romaunt, 1142-3.]
Ibid., Library edn., vol. xxiii, p. 124.
[Quotation of Romaunt, 1213, etc.]
