
76 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1880
[p. 31] The charm is departed. It is often said that the power of
liquidness and fluidity in Chaucer's verse was dependent
upon a free, a licentious dealing with language such as is now
impossible; upon a liberty, such as Burns too enjoyed, of
making words like neck, bird, into a dissyllable by adding to
them, and words like cause, rhyme, into a dissyllable by sound
sounding the e mute. It is true that Chaucer’s fluidity is
conjoined with this liberty, and is admirably served by it;
but we ought not to say that it was dependent upon it. It
was dependent upon his talent. Other poets with a like
liberty do not attain to the fluidity of Chaucer; Burns him¬
self does not attain to it. Poets, again, who have a talent
akin to Chaucer's, such as Shakespeare or Keats, have known
how to attain to his fluidity without the like liberty.
And yet Chaucer is not one of the great classics. His
poetry transcends and effaces, easily and without effort, all
the romance-poetry of Catholic Christendom; it transcends
[p. 32] and effaces all the English poetry contemporary with it, it
transcends and effaces all the English poetry subsequent to it
down to the age of Elizabeth. Of such avail is poetic truth
of substance, in its natural and necessary union with poetic
truth of style. And yet, I say, Chaucer is not one of the
great classics. He has not their accent. What is wanting to
him is suggested by the mere mention of the name of the first
great classic of Christendom, the immortal poet who died
eighty years before Chaucer,—Dante. The accent of such
verse as
"In la sua volontade e nostra pace..."
is altogether beyond Chaucer's reach; we praise him, but we
feel that this accent is out of the question for him. It may be
said that it was necessarily out of the reach of any poet in
the England of that stage of growth. Possibly; but we are to
adopt a real, not a historic, estimate of poetry. However, we
may account for its absence, something is wanting, then, to
the poetry of Chaucer, which poetry must have before it can
be placed in the glorious class of the best. And there is a
[p. 33] doubt what that something is. It is the σπονδαιότης, the
high and excellent seriousness which Aristotle assigns as one
of the grand virtues of poetry. The substance of Chaucer's
poetry, his view of things and his criticism of life, has
largeness, freedom, shrewdness, benignity; but it has not
