
1870] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 23
regarded as the best manuscript of the 'Canterbury Tales,'
in the best form, carefully revised, and corrected throughout.
The important question is, whether a still better text may
not be produced by the critical collation of other manuscripts.
Mr. Wright, as we have seen, scouts this notion; and even
Mr. Furnivall, the editor of the Chaucer Society texts, seems
disposed to answer it in a somewhat hesitating manner. At
least he expresses himself as disappointed at the extent of
general agreement between the manuscripts the Society has
undertaken to publish.
A comparison of Mr. Morris’s text of the 'Prologue' and
the 'Knight’s Tale' with the texts of the Society, has,
however, convinced us that the question as to possible
improvement must be answered decisively in the affirmative.
Knowing beforehand the excellence of the Harleian text, and
the general agreement of the six other manuscripts, we have
been surprised indeed at the number of emendations of
greater or less importance they afford. In the 'Prologue'
alone there are, in our judgment, upwards of fifty lines that
may be improved by collation either in sense or metre, while
in the 'Knight’s Tale' the better readings are in proportion
to its length even more numerous and important. These
better readings affect mainly the metre, the meaning, or the
poetical expressiveness of the existing text. Some, again,
effect marked improvements in minutiæ of grammar, em¬
phasis, and spelling. While nothing can be more arbitrary
and unsettled than the orthography of Chaucer’s day, and
indeed for centuries later, the spelling of the Harleian manu¬
script is still peculiarly harsh and clumsy, especially in the
case of proper names, and they might easily be altered for
the better on the authority of the other texts. The improve¬
ments in the metre are effected sometimes by the simple
transposition of words in the line, sometimes by exchanging
one form of word for another, and often in both ways. Some¬
times again by the omission of a superfluous word or syllable,
and at others by the introduction of a word or syllable that at
once fills up the measure and completes the sense. The read¬
ings that improve the meaning do so usually by removing
vagueness and ambiguity, and giving increased clearness and
precision to the image or idea presented. This is accom¬
plished in various ways, sometimes by the apt use of defining
epithets and particles, as this lord instead of the lord (172),
