
1873] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 43
archness and vivacity, an incessant elasticity and freshness,
an indescribable ease, a never faltering variety, an incapability
of dulness. . . .
For skill in characterization who can be ranked between
Chaucer and Shakespeare? Is there any work, except the
'theatre' of Shakespeare, that attempts, with a success
in any way comparable, the astonishing task which Chaucer
sets himself? He attempts to portray the entire society
of his age from the crown of its head to the sole of its foot—
from the knight, the topmost figure of mediæval life, down
to the ploughman and the cook; and the result is a gallery
of life-like portraits, which has no parallel anywhere, with
one exception, for variety, truthfulness, humanity. [This
is elaborated.] ...
[p. 232] We ask, who among our poets, except Shakespeare, shall
be placed above Chaucer in this domain of art? In our
opinion there is not one of the Elizabethans that deserves
that honour. . . .
[p. 234] [Chaucer's pathos contrasted with Steine's, and Shake¬
speare’s.
[p. 236] [Chaucer’s irony.
[p. 237] It is because his spirit enjoyed and retained this lofty
freedom that it was so tolerant and capacious. He, like
Shakespeare, was eminently a Human Catholic, no mere
sectary. He refused to no man an acknowledgment of
kindred. . . .
[p. 238] There is just one point of personal likeness between Chaucer
and Shakespeare that we wish to notice. Of each man, as
his contemporaries knew him, the chief characteristic was
a wonderful loveableness of Nature. ... [Quotations from
Jonson, Occleve, Lydgate, &c. on this point.]
[pp. 240- [On Shakespeare’s probable knowledge of Chaucer’s work,
]
a subject not yet sufficiently investigated, with remarks
on Chaucer’s fame and accessibility in Shakespeare’s time.
The Two Noble Kinsmen considered, and the reason for no
mention of him in Richard II and Henry IV thought to be
that he would, as a poet, have seemed out of place in an
historical setting. Shakspere’s acquaintance with the
Knight’s Tale and Troylus to be seen in Midsummer-Night's
Dream, Two Noble Kinsmen, Venus and Adonis, Tarquin and
Lucrece, Troilus and Cressida, Romeo and Juliet; while in
As You Like It is seen knowledge of Gamelyn. Parallel
passages are quoted, and the subject is further discussed.]
