[1386?]. Deschamps, Eustache. Ballad addressed to Geoffrey Chaucer
by Deschamps, when sending him his own works. Unique MS.
Bibliothèque nationale, No. 840, fonds français, fol. Ixii, Ixii verso.
Œuvres complètes d’Eustache Deschamps, publiées par le marquis
de Queux de Saint Hilaire, Société des Anciens Textes Français,
vol. ii, 1880, pp. 138-40.
AUTRE BALADE1
O Socrates plains de philosophie
Seneque en meurs et anglux en pratique
Ouides grans en ta poeterie
Bries en parler saiges en rethorique
Aigles treshaulz qui par ta theorique
5
Enlumines le regne deneas
Lisle aux geans ceuls de bruth2 et qui as
Seme les fleurs et plante le rosier
Aux ignorans de la langue pandras3
Grant translateur noble geffroy chaucier
10
1The exact text of the manuscript is here printed. This may be useful, as
it has often been reprinted with different corrections. Thus slight changes
have been made in its text, even in the edition of the Anciens Textes Français,
without due comment. For example :—
line 25
PRINTED TEXT.
line 20, 30
Qui en Gaule
MANUSCRIPT.
Grand
Qui men gaule
line 32
seroye
Grant
seroie.
2 Deschamps obtains the name by which he designates England from the
Brut of Wace; cf. the ballade of Deschamps, Sur les divers noms de l’Angle¬
terre, with the refrain "C’est de ce mot l’interpretacion," Œuvres vi, pp. 87-8;
and De la prophecie de Merlin sur la destruction d’Angleterre qui doit brief
advenir, refrain "Ou temps jadis estoit ci Angleterre," Œuvres ii, pp. 33-4.
La langue pandras–the French language. The idea of this expression
comes also from Wace. Pandras was a mythical king of Greece, who had been
vanquished by Brutus–the first king of Britain (England) according to the
legend–at the head of a certain number of Trojan exiles who had been kept
as slaves by Pandras. When Brutus, with the Trojan victors, landed in
"Albion," he founded the realm of Britain. The language of the inhabitants
of Britain (that of Chaucer) is first of all called Trojan, then "British," i.e. the
language of Brutus. The language of Brutus being English, the language of
Pandras, the enemy of Brutus, must have been French, the language of the
hereditary enemies of England. See an article in the Academy, Nov. 14, 1891,
p. 432, by Dr. Paget Toynbee, on this ballade.
16
[A.D. 1386] French Allusions. 17
Tu es damours mondains dieux en albie
Et de la rose en laterre angelique
Qui dangela saxonne et1 puis flourie
Angleterre delle ce nom sapplique
Le derrenier en lethimologique
15
En bon angles le livre translatas
Et un vergier ou du plant demandas
De ceuls qui font2 pour eulx auctorisier
A ja long temps que tu edifias
Grant translateur noble geffroy chaucier
20
A toy pour ce de la fontaine helye
Requier avoir un buuraige autentique
Dont la doys est du tout en ta baillie
Pour rafrener delle ma soif ethique
Qui men3 gaule seray paralitique
25
Jusques a ce que tu mabuueras
Eustaces sui qui de mon plant aras
Mais pran en gre les euures descolier
Que par clifford de moy auoir pourras
Grant translateur noble gieffroy chaucier
30
LENUOY
Poete hault loenge destmye4
En ton jardin ne seroie quortie
Considere5 ce que jay dit premier
Ton noble plant ta douce melodie
Mais pour scauoir de rescripre te prie
35
Grant translateur noble geffroy chaucier.
1 est?
2 Ceuls qui font, i.e. the poets, "the makers." Cf. Chaucer in the Compleynt
of Venus, where he speaks of Oton de Graunson as "flour of hem that make
in Fraunce."
3 en?
4 Destmye. It appears to us that this is without doubt, the reading ot the
manuscript, although, at first sight, “destruye" might seem to be correct. But
on close inspection it will be seen that the down-stroke of the m is without
the small hook that the scribe attaches throughout to the r. "destinye"
is possible, but no dot is visible over the i. It seems impossible to discover
the sense of the passage. Toynbee and Ker suggest “deservye" (Academy,
Nov. 14, 1891), Nicholas, Wright and Sandras suggest “destinye"; "destruye"
is printed in the edn. of the Anciens Textes Français, and Tarbé (Œuvres
inédites de Deschamps, 1819, tome i, pp. 123-4) is the sole editor who has
previously printed the word as it is found in the manuscript.
5 Should it be read considéré?