1846. Hunt, James Henry Leigh. Wit and Humour, Selected from
the English Poets. With an Illustrative Essay, and Critical Com¬
ments, pp. 12, 18-19, 63, 73-121.
[p.12.] Humour... deals in incongruities of character and
circumstance,... Such is the melting together... of
the professional and the individual, or the accidental and the
permanent, in the Canterbury Pilgrims...
[pp. 18,
19]
[The Cock's address to the Hen:
For also siker as in principio...
etc. (Nonne Prestes Tale), quoted as an example of irony.]
[p.63] [Chaucer famous for the humours of nations and classes.]
[p. 74] I wish I could have given more than one comic story out
of Chaucer; but the change of manners renders it difficult at
any time, and impossible in a book like the present.
 . . . . . . . . .
[p. 75] When Chaucer is free from this taint of his age [i.e.
coarseness], his humour is of a description the most thoroughly
delightful; for it is at once entertaining, profound, and good¬
natured. If this last quality be thought a drawback by some,
as wanting the relish of personality, they may supply even
that (as some have supplied it), by supposing that he drew
his characters from individuals, and that the individuals were
very uncomfortable accordingly. I confess I see no ground
for the supposition beyond what the nature of the case
demands. Classes must of course be drawn, more or less,
from the individuals composing them; but the unprofessional
particulars added by Chaucer to his characters (such as the
Merchant's uneasy marriage, and the Franklin's prodigal son)
are only such as render the portraits more true, by including
them in the general category of human kind. The gangrene
which the Cook had on his shin, and which has been con¬
sidered as a remarkable instance of the gratuitous, is, on the
contrary (besides its masterly intimation of the perils of luxury
in general), painfully in character with a man accustomed to
breathe an unhealthy atmosphere, and to be encouraging bad
humours with tasting sauces and syrups. Besides, the Cook
turns out to be a drunkard.
[p. 76] Chaucer's comic genius is so perfect, that it may be said to
include prophetic intimations of all that followed it...
One of its characteristics is a certain tranquil detection of
particulars, expressive of generals; as in the instance just
mentioned of the secret infirmity of the Cook. Thus the
Prioress speaks French; but it is "after the school of Stratford
at Bow." Her education was altogether more showy than
substantial. The Lawyer was the busiest man in the world,
and yet he "seemed busier than he was." He made something
out of nothing, even in appearances.
Another characteristic is his fondness for seeing the spiritual
in the material; the mind in the man's aspect. He is as
studious of physiognomy as Lavater, and far truer. Observe,
too, the poetry that accompanies it,–the imaginative sympathy
in the matter of fact. His Yeoman, who is a forester, has a
head "like a nut." His Miller is as brisk and healthy as the
air of the hill on which he lives, and as hardy and as coarse¬
grained as his conscience. We know, as well as if we had
ridden with them, his oily-faced Monk; his lisping Friar (who
was to make confession easy to the ladies); his carbuncled
[p. 77] Summoner or Church-Bailiff, the grossest form of ecclesiastical
sensuality; and his irritable money-getting Reve or Steward,
with his cropped head and calf-less legs, who shaves his beard
as closely as he reckons with his master's tenants.
The third great quality of Chaucer's humour is its fair
play;—the truth and humanity which induces him to see
justice done to good and bad, to the circumstances which
moke men what they are, and the mixture of right and wrong,
of wisdom and of folly, which they consequently exhibit.
His worst characters have some little saving grace of good¬
nature, or at least of joviality and candour. Even the Pardoner,
however impudently, acknowledges himself to be a “vicious
man." His best people, with one exception, betray some
infirmity. The good Clerk of Oxford, for all his simplicity
and singleness of heart, has not escaped the pedantry and
pretension of the college. The Good Parson seems without
a blemish, even in his wisdom; yet when it comes to his turn
to relate a story, he announces it as a "little" tale, and then
tells the longest and most prosing in the book, —a whole
sermonizing volume. ...
[p. 78] The only character in Chaucer which seems faultless,
is that of the Knight; and he is a man who has been all over
the world, and bought experience with hard blows. The poet
does not spare his own person. He describes himself as a fat,
heavy man, with an "elvish" (wildish?) countenance, shy,
and always "staring on the ground.  ..
This self-knowledge is a part of Chaucer's greatness;
and these modest proofs of it distinguish him from every
other poet in the language. Shakespeare may have had as
much, or more. It is difficult to suppose otherwise.  ...
His sonnets are not without intimations of personal and other
defects; but they contain no such candid talking as Chaucer.
[p. 79] The father of English poetry was essentially a modest man.
He sits quietly in a corner, looking down for the most part
and meditating; at other times eyeing everything that passes,
and sympathising with everything; chuckling heartily at a
jest, feeling his eyes fill with tears at sorrow, reverencing
virtue, and not out of charity with vice. When he ventures
to tell a story himself, it is as much under correction of the
Host as the humblest man in the company; and it is no
sooner objected to, than he drops it for one of a different
description.
[Here follow selections, each with a modernized version
printed below, and notes: Characters of Pilgrims (Prologue).
The Friar's Tale. The Pardoner's way of Preaching. The
Merchant's Opinion of Wives. Gallantry of Translation (Cock
and the Fox). The Disappearance of the Fairies.]