1838] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 223
that "the natural course" of English verse "ran upon the
Iambicke stroke.   ... He might have been taught sounder
doctrine by his contemporary Gascoigne [q.v. above, 1575,
vol. i, p. 111]. This critic... admires "the libertie in
feete and measures" used by their Father Chaucer.
..
[vol ii, [Couplet metre.] Loose as is the rhythm of these verses
p. 237] [an extract from Rolle’s Prick of Conscience], I have seen few
manuscripts of the Canterbury Tales, which admit of a more
definite scansion. The best copies indeed I have not seen;
and I think it probable that Chaucer at least confined his
metre to the verse of five accents; but any more particular
definition I dare not venture upon. Before we can understand
the nature of his versification–before we can render Chaucer
that justice, which his genius so loudly calls for–we have to
settle questions that require for their solution the most search¬
ing... investigations. [Untrustworthiness of the MSS.]
That Chaucer was a master of English versification no one,
that reads him with due care and attention, can well doubt.
There are many passages in his works, which, from the agree¬
ment of MSS. and the absence of all those peculiarities of
structure that leave matter for doubt, have, in all probability,
come down to us as Chaucer wrote them–and in these the
[p. 238] versification is as exquisite as the poetry. It needs not the
somewhat suspicious apology of Dryden. I am not one of
those who assert, that Chaucer has always "ten syllables in
a verse, where we find but nine"; but I am as far from
believing, that "he lived in the infancy of our poetry," because
the scheme of his metre somewhat differs from our own. As
far as we have the means of judging, it was not only "auribus
istius temporis accommodata," but fulfilled every requisite
that modern criticism has laid down, as either essential to the
science, or conducive to the beauty of a versification.
The metre of five accents, with couplet-rhyme, may have
got its earliest name of "riding rhyme" from the mounted
pilgrims of the Canterbury Tales. [Quotes Gascoigne and
Puttenham, q. v. above, 1575 and 1584-8, vol. i, pp. 111
and 125.]
[p. 239] [Blank verse.] The unrhimed metre of five accents, or as
it is generally termed blank verse, we certainly owe to Surrey.
English verse without rhime was no novelty; and the
"cadence" of Chaucer comes full as near to the blank verse
of five accents, as the loose rhythms of some of our dramatists.
