1845] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion  261
[pp. 15
and 16]
PHILIP : . . . You must put no faith at all in any idea
you may have got of Chaucer from Dryden or Pope. Dryden
appreciated his original better than Pope; but neither of them
had a particle of his humor, nor of the simplicity of his
pathos.  ... Pope was not a man to understand the quiet
tenderness of Chaucer, where you almost seem to hear the
hot tears falling, and the simple, choking words sobbed out.
I know no author so tender as he, not even Shakspeare.
[A comparison of the Knightes Tale, ll. 1903-1924, with
Dryden's version follows; and while Dryden's version is
described as "the sentiment of Giles Scroggins, and the verse
of Blackmore," Chaucer's is considered "perfect." After some
further discussion Philip continues:]
[p. 21] The recording angel had but little trouble in footing
Chaucer's account. The uncleanness of his age has left a
smooch here and there upon his poems; but it is only in the
margin, and may be torn off without injury to the text. His
love of beauty was too sincere not to have made him truly
pious.  ...
[p. 22] I love to call him old Chaucer. The farther I can throw
him back into the past, the dearer he grows; so sweet is it to
mark how his plainness and sincerity outlive all changes of
[p. 24] the outward world. ... His simplicity often reminds me
of Homer; but, except in the single quality of invention,
I prefer him to the Ionian. Yet we must remember that he
shares this deficiency with Shakspeare, who scarcely ever
scrupled to run in debt for his plots.  ...
[p. 25] There is in him the exuberant freshness and greenness
of spring. Everything he touches leaps into full blossom.
His gladness and humor and pathos are irrepressible as a
[p. 26] fountain.  ... There is no nebulosity of sentiment about
him, no insipid vagueness in his sympathies. His chief merit,
the chief one in all art, is sincerity.
[A discussion, with quotations from the Nonne Prestes Tale,
follows, pp. 29-33, 40-47. Chaucer and Crabbe are compared,
p. 35; and the description of the Shipman in the Prologue
is read. Elizabeth Barrett's lines on Chaucer (q.v. above,
1844) cited, p. 38. Chaucer's piety is discussed, p. 58,
and the possibility, from the Clerkes Tale, of his having
boen in Italy and met Petrarch, pp. 63-64. The Clerkes Tale
is next discussed, pp. 65-7. Some of the other references
are: Troilus, pp. 73, 93, 112; Chaucer's love of nature,
p. 77; Legend of Good Women, pp, 84, 99; Cowden Clarke’s
