1841] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Horne.] 235
Queen Annelida and False Arcite, by Elizabeth B. Barrett,
pp. 237-257.
The Squire's Tale, by Leigh Hunt, pp. 260-287 [Hunt's
second version : for the first see above, 1823].
The Franklin’s Tale, by R. H. Horne, pp. 290-331.
[From Horne’s Introduction, we print the following:]
[p. v] The present publication does not result from an antiquarian
feeling about Chaucer, as the Father of English Poetry, highly
interesting as he must always be in that character alone; but
from the extraordinary fact, to which there is no parallel in
the history of the literature of nations,—that although he is
one of the great poets for all time, his works are compara¬
tively unknown to the world. Even in his own country, only
a very small class of his countrymen ever read his poems.
Had Chaucer's poems been written in Greek or Hebrew, they
[p. vi] would have been a thousand times better known. They
would have been translated. Hitherto they have had almost
everything done for them that a nation could desire, in so far
as the most careful collation of texts, the most elaborate
essays, the most ample and erudite notes and glossaries, the
most elaborate and classical (as well as the most trite and
vulgar) paraphrases, the most eloquent and sincere admiration
and comments of genuine poets, fine prose writers, and scholars
–everything, in short, has been done, except to make them
intelligible to the general reader.
Except in the adoption of a modern typography, Chaucer's
poems have always appeared hitherto, under no better
auspices for modern appreciation than on their first day of
publication, some three centuries and a half ago. Concerning
the various attempts to render several of his poems available
to the public, which have been made at intervals by poets
and lovers of Chaucer, a few remarks will shortly be sub¬
mitted. With whatever reverence or admiration these latter
may have been received by the readers of those poets who in¬
[p. vii] troduced such specimens among their own works, it is certain
that they produced no perceptible effect in the popularity of
the original author.
Whether there has been a feeling in the public about
Chaucer, amounting to a sort of unconscious resentment at the
total inability to read his poems without first bestowing the
same pains upon his glossary, which has been more willingly
