1836. Unknown. Chaucer, [in] The Gentleman's Magazine, new
series, vol. v, pp. 501-4; vol. vi, pp. 44-8.
[vol. v,
p. 501]
Few writers are more neglected, less studied, or less known,
though none are more talked of, than Geoffrey Chaucer. And
yet, whether we consider the richness and diversity of his
genius, the soundness of his feelings, the harmony of his
verse, or, in most instances, the subjects he has chosen, few
poets are less deserving of neglect. The language, too, after
all, is not so far removed from our own, as to throw much
difficulty in the way even of the general reader...
[p. 502] The neglect which Chaucer has experienced, arises, perhaps,
in a great measure, from the failings of his editors. [On the
loss of final e, destroying the secret of Chaucer's metre, and
the failure of the early printers, except Caxton, to adhere to
the MSS.]
Early in the last century, John Urry, of Christ's [sic] Church,
Oxford, first undertook to give a perfect and complete text of
Chaucer's works; and, to judge by the list of manuscripts
which he has left us, he had no reason for complaining of lack
of materials. But, in spite of the encomiums which were
lavished upon him by the editor who finished his edition; in
spite of "his skill in the northern language spoken in the
Lowlands of Scotland," which “qualified him to read this
poet with more ease and pleasure than one altogether bred
be-south the Trent could do, without more than common
application;" still Urry was too ignorant of the language and
spirit of his author, too deficient in correct philological know¬
ledge, to perform, with any degree of success, the task he had
undertaken... His list of manuscripts, too, is a mere
parade...
[p. 504] [A passage in praise of Tyrwhitt's work, with some remarks
on orthography, and some quotations from Orm, the philo¬
logical value of whose work Tyrwhitt overlooked.]
[vol. vi,
pp. 44-8]
[An attack on Cowden Clarke's Riches of Chaucer, fol¬
lowed by eulogy of the Prologue, with extracts, descriptions
of the characters, and quotations from Piers Plowman.]