1831. Southey, Robert. Select Works of the British Poets, from Chaucer
to Jonson, with biographical Sketches by Robert Southey, 1831,
Preface; biography of Chaucer, p. 1, poems, pp. 2-60.
[The selected poems of Chaucer are : The Prologue to the
Canterbury Tales, the Knightes, the Man of Law's, the
Clerkes and the Squieres Tales, The Parlement of Foules, The
Cuckoo and the Nightingale (not by Chaucer), The Flower
and the Leaf (not by Chaucer), Good Counsail of Chaucer,
and To His Empty Purse. The biography is a short summary
of the facts as then known or assumed, based on the Testament
of Love and the Court of Love, &c. The following are the
principal critical remarks:]
Chaucer is not merely the acknowleged father of English
poetry, he is also one of our greatest poets. His proper
station is in the first class, with Spenser, Shakspeare, and
Milton; and Shakspeare alone has equalled him in variety
and versatility of genius. In no other country has any
writer effected so much with a half-formed language : retain¬
ing what was popular, and rejecting what was barbarous, he
at once refined and enriched it; and though it is certain that
his poetry is written rhythmically rather than metrically, his
ear led him to that cadence and those forms of verse, which,
after all subsequent experiments, have been found most
agreeable to the general taste, and may, therefore, be deemed
best adapted to the character of our speech. In some of his
smaller pieces, he has condescended to use the ornate style
which began to be affected in his age ; but he has only used it as
if to show that he had deliberately rejected it in all his greater
and better works... his original works are distinguished by
a life, and strength, and vivacity, which nothing but original
genius, and that of the highest order, can impart. Whoever
aspires to a lasting name among the English poets must get
the writings of Chaucer, and drink at the well-head....
[Then follow the selected poems, as above.]
[For a more expanded expression of Southey's opinion that Chancer's verse is
rhythmical rather than metrical, see below, 1833-6. For Nott, see above, 1815-16.]
