1831. Bentley, Samuel. Excerpta Historica, or Illustrations of English
History. Issue of Katherine Swynford, pp. 148, 155, 205-7, 210,
230-1, 239, 253, 353.
[p. 153] The following document and other notices will throw
some light on the subject; and as the Swynfords, besides
being closely connected with the blood-royal, were, according
to the poet’s biographers, though the fact is very questionable,
nearly allied to Chaucer, this article may be deemed to possess
more interest than is generally found in genealogical statements.
Sir Payne Roelt, a Knight of Hainault, and Guienne King¬
of-Arms, had, it is said, two daughters and co-heirs, Philippa
and Katherine. No particulars of his pedigree have been
discovered; his arms, in allusion to his name, were Gules,
three Katherine wheels Or.
Philippa, his eldest daughter, is stated to have been the
maid of honour to Philippa Queen of Edward the Third
who by the name of "Philippa Pycard" obtained a grant
of one hundred shillings per annum on the 28th January
1370, and married Geoffrey Chaucer, to whom, in consequence,
it is supposed, of this connection, the Duke of Lancaster
granted the Castle of Dodington [sic]. Of John of Gaunt's con¬
nection with Chaucer, however, no proof has been found; and
the circumstance of the lady assigned to him for his wife
being styled “Philippa Pycard," instead of Roelt, renders the
assertion, that she was the sister of the Duchess of Lancaster,
extremely doubtful.
 . . . . . . .
[p. 353]
Letters relating to the Stonor Family.
The following... deserve insertion as illustrative of the
private history of the family. The first is a letter from
Alice, Duchess of Suffolk, wife of William de la Pole, Duke
of Suffolk, to William Stonor. The Duchess, as being the
grand-daughter of Geoffrey Chaucer, is an object of interest.
The poet's eldest son is said to have been Thomas Chaucer,
who became Speaker of the House of Commons, and was a
very eminent person in the reigns of Henry the Fifth and
Sixth. His only child, Alice, married William de la Pole,
Earl, Marquess, and Duke of Suffolk; but her issue became
extinct in the reign of Henry the Eighth, when all the
descendants of Geoffrey Chaucer failed. Their son, John do
la Pole, Duke of Suffolk, had a natural daughter, Johanna,
who married Thomas Stonor, and had issue by him Sir
William, Thomas (from whom descended the Stonors of
Stonor), and two other sons who died without issue.