1845. North, Christopher [ps., i. e. John Wilson]. Specimens of the
British Critics, [in] Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine, April 1845,
vol. lvii, pp. 503, 508; May, pp. 617-46; June, pp. 771-93; July,
vol. lviii, pp. 114-28. [Published in volume form in 1846; the
references are: pp. 63-4, 66, 77, 95, 111, 120, 157-266.]
[p. 617] Nothing is gained by attempting to deny or to disguise a
known and plain fact, simply because it happens to be a dis¬
tasteful one–Time has estranged us from Chaucer. Dryden
and Pope we read with easy, unearned pleasure. Their speech,
their manner of mind, and their facile verse, are of our age,
almost of our own day. The two excellent, graceful, and
masterly poets belong, both of them, to THIS NEW WORLD.
Go back a little, step over an imperceptible line, to the con¬
temporary of Dryden, Milton, and you seem to have overleaped
some great chronological boundary; you have transported
yourself into THAT OLD WORLD...
We call Chaucer the Father of our Poetry, or its Morn¬
ing Star. The poetical memory of the country stretches up to
him, and not beyond. The commanding impression which he
has made upon the minds of his people dates from his own
day. The old poets of England and Scotland constantly and
unanimously acknowledge him for their master. Greatest
names, Dunbar, Douglas, Spenser, Milton, carry on the
tradition of his renown and his reign.
In part he belongs to, and in part he lifts himself out of, his
age. The vernacular poetry of reviving Europe took a strong
stamp from one principal feature in the manners of the times.
The wonderful political institution of Chivalry-turned into a
romance in the minds of those in whose persons the thing
itself subsisted–raised up a fanciful adoration of women
[p. 615] into a law of courtly life; or, at the least, of courtly verse, to
which there was nothing answerable in the annals of the old
world.  .../
This exaggeration of an immense natural power, Love–
making, one might almost say, man's worship of woman the
great religion of the universe, and which was the "amabilis
insania" of the new poetry-long exercised an unlimited
monarchy in the poetical mind of the reasonable Chaucer.
See the longest and most desperate of his Translations–which
Tyrwhitt supposes him to have completed, though we have
[p. 619] only two fragments– seven thousand verses in place of twenty¬
two thousand–the "ROMAUNT OT THE ROSE"...