1880. Campbell, Thomas. Chaucer, [in] Brewster's Edinburgh
Encyclopædia, vol. v, pt. ii, pp. 756-62.
[A long and very appreciative article, echoing in parts the
author's Essay of 1819, q. v. above. The earlier and bio¬
graphical part is careful, and describes Godwin's Life as "'a
series of suppositions," but the story of Chaucer’s exile and
imprisonment is treated as certain. Campbell notes that the
inscription and figures on Chaucer's tomb were at the time of
writing almost obliterated.
Chaucer found English poetry in the rudest state; he
introduced the heroic iambic line. The Court of Love, “his
first poem,” noticed at length. Troilus and Criseyde, his next
poem, analysed; its anachronisms.]
[p. 760] Next to the length of the poem, the greatest obstacle to our
interest in it is an inconsistency between the strength and
tenderness, and the lawlessness and secrecy of Troilus’s passion.
The poet represents no sufficient cause to prevent the Trojan
from marrying Cresseide.  ... This is a departure from
nature and probability, the more remarkable in a poet whose
characteristic merit is generally adherence to both. Yet this
tale of Troy divine, which Sir Philip Sydney adored, and
which was once regarded as an ornament to our language, did
not fascinate our forefathers without a reason. As an ancient
novel in verse, it reminds us very frequently of the minute
touches and pathos of Richardson. [The confession of Criseyde
and the grief of Troilus (as in 1819).]
[The Dream (Isle of Ladies), Book of the Duchesse, Parle¬
ment of Foules, Romaunt of the Rose, Flower and the Leaf,
Hous of Fame. The Canterbury Tales the work of his old
age; the plan from Boccaccio; the naturalism of the characters,
and the dramatic contrasts between them. Chaucer's other
virtues inferior to this; his incongruities, e.g. the “cooke
scalded for all his longe ladle." The great architect of our
versification, but not an importer of French words. His
prolixity, like his coarseness, a fault of his time.]
[p. 762] [The beauties] of Chaucer may be compared to flowers which
we collect in a long journey, numerous in the sum, but
collected widely asunder. This expression may appear
irreverend to those who are enamoured of old English and
obsolete spelling, merely because it is old and obsolete; but
the reader who sits down to Chaucer, expecting wonders in
every page, will find, that though there is much to reward
his patience, there is also something to exercise it.