1849. Unknown. Chaucer, [in] The North British Review, Edinburgh,
1849, vol. x, pp. 293-328. [A review of Nicolas’s edition of the
Works, Saunders' Cabinet Pictures and Canterbury Tales, Deshler's
Selections, Horne’s Poems Modernised, and Cowden Clarke’s Tales
from Chaucer and Riches of Chaucer.]
[p. 294] The first question, as it seems to us which we are bound
at once to ask or to answer, is–belongs he [Chaucer]
to the living or to the dead; does he or does he not speak
words of living interest to living men; is he or is he not
an integral part of our existing civilisation?...
... So far is his story from being strange and distant to us,
that we believe every one who investigates it for the first
time will feel astonished that it should have been possible
for any one, in the times of Cressy and of Poictiers, to
lead a life in all respects so nearly resembling that of an
accomplished and successful civilian at the present day.
[Here follow an appreciation of recent work on Chaucer,
especially that of Saunders and Nicolas, who are both con¬
trasted favourably with Godwin; and a life of Chaucer, largely
based on the latter, occupies pp. 299-314.]
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. 324] In its form it [the speech which Chaucer employed] was
the Saxon of Edward the Confessor, with such flectional
modifications as three centuries of further development had
effected; and in its substance it had superadded to the great
Saxon substratum such Norman words as the contact of three
centuries had gradually introduced...
[p. 325] A few observations before parting, for the purpose of fixing,
in some measure, the rank that he is entitled to hold among
our poets.   ... We do not venture to equal him to
the two greatest of them. With Milton, indeed, he can in
no wise be compared, for the difference in kind is so absolute
as to render it impossible to measure the degree; and by
Shakespeare he is unquestionably surpassed in his own
walk.  ...
As a poet of character- and as such chiefly he must be
viewed, we believe him to come nearer to Shakespeare than
any other writer in the language. There is the same vigour
in all that he pourtrays, the same tone of health belongs to it.
... We believe that no writer ever was so healthy as
[p. 326] Chaucer is essentially the poet of man. Brought up from
Chaucer.  ...
the first from among his fellows and discharging to the last
the duties of a citizen, he wandered not,–nor wished to
wander in solitary places. His poetry is that of reality.  ...
[pp. 327-  ... In many respects it seems to us that Chaucer resembles
8]
Goethe more than any of the poets of our own country. He
has the same mental completeness and consequent versatility
which distinguish the German; the same love of reality;
the same clearness and cheerfulness; and, in seeming con¬
tradiction to this latter characteristic, the same preference for
grief over the other passions, in his poetical delineations. In
minor respects, he also resembles him, and in one, not
unimportant, as marking a similarity of mental organization,
that, namely, of betaking himself at the close of a long life
spent in literature and affairs, to the study of the physical
sciences, as if here alone the mental craving for the positive
could find satisfaction.