1837. Unknown. Chateaubriand on the Literature of England, [in]The
Edinburgh Review, Jan., 1837, vol. lxiv, pp. 520-23, 525-6, 528.
[p. 521] When Chaucer wrote, though borrowing largely from the
[p. 522] early Italian poetry–though not untinctured by the Norman
—it was at once a national poet formed by national circum¬
stances, and appealing to a nation! Though, as we before
said, a scholar and a courtier, it was in Chaucer that the
literary spirit of the English people, vigorous, simple, and
truthful, found its voice. It was an immense encouragement
to the English language that a man so clerkly and so well
with the great, should have given it the preference to the
French. Unquestionably the extraordinary popularity of the
'Canterbury Tales,'  and the 'Troilus and Cresseide' had a
prodigious effect in rendering the language of a conquered
people not only familiar but musical to the conquerors.
Chaucer wrote for the people, but it was in the style of a
gentleman. And he at once familiarized the Anglo-Norman
and refined the Anglo-Saxon genius. The sympathies of
Chaucer are not those of coteries and courts, they are with
common and universal feelings. He has a passionate love of
nature, and his minute and close descriptions are very different
indeed from the pastoral affectations of the Trouveres and
Troubadours. He has also that clear and racy power of dis¬
criminating and individualizing character, which springs from
an observant eye and a social temper. Chaucer is the earliest
writer in modern literature whose characters are strongly
marked and distinct. His passages are to those of Boccaccio
what Homer's are to those of Virgil; and the study of
Chaucer would, like that of Homer, conduce insensibly to the
Drama. It was, perhaps, his constitutional sympathy with
broad interests and universal feelings, no less than the con¬
cession of his reason to the tenets of Wickliff, that made
Chaucer a satirist of monks and priests. He seems to have
had a practical and shrewd philosophy in his easy sarcasms on
these holy men, which is more subtile and thoughtful than
the careless gibes of the Troubadours. The active career of
