1843. Thoreau, Henry David. Homer, Ossian, Chaucer. Extracts from
a Lecture on Poetry. Read before the Concord Lyceum, Nov. 29,
1843, by Henry D. Thoreau, [printed in] The Dial (Boston), vol. iv,
Jan. 1844, pp. 297-303. [Reprinted (revised) in] A Week on the
Concord and Merrimack Rivers, 1849, pp. 386-93. (Writings,
Riverside Edn., 1894-5, 10 vols., vol. i, pp. 364-5, 417-8, 436,
483-94.)
[p. 488] What a contrast between the stern and desolate poetry of
Ossian, and that of Chaucer.  ...When we come to the
[p. 484] pleasant English verse, the storms have all cleared away, and
it will never thunder and lighten more. The poet has come
within doors.  ...
[p. 485] Notwithstanding the broad humanity of Chaucer, and the
many social and domestic comforts which we meet with in his
verse, we have to narrow our vision somewhat to consider him,
as if he occupied less space in the landscape, and did not
stretch over hill and valley as Ossian does. Yet, seen from
the side of posterity, as the father of English poetry, preceded
by a long silence or confusion in history, unenlivened by any
strain of pure melody, we easily come to reverence him.  ...
Chaucer's is the first name after that misty weather in which
Ossian lived, which can detain us long. Indeed, though he
represents so different a culture and society, he may be
regarded as in many respects the Homer of the English poets.
Perhaps he is the youthfulest of them all.  ... He is so
natural and cheerful, compared with later poets, that we might
[p. 486] almost regard him as a personification of spring. ... It is
still the poetry of youth and life rather than of thought. ...
[p. 487] Chaucer had eminently the habits of a literary man and a
scholar. There were never any times so stirring that there
were not to be found some sedentary still. He was surrounded
by the din of arms.  ... He regarded himself always as one
privileged to sit and converse with books. He helped to
establish the literary class. His character as one of the
fathers of the English language would alone make his works
important, even those which have little poetical merit. He
was as simple as Wordsworth in preferring his homely but
vigorous Saxon tongue, when it was neglected by the court,
and had not yet attained to the dignity of a literature, and
rendered a similar service to his country to that which Dante
rendered to Italy... In the [Prologue to the] Testament of
[p. 488] Love he writes, “Let then clerkes enditen in Latin, for they
have the propertie of science... and let Frenchmen in their
French also enditen their queinte termes... and let us
shewe our fantasies in soche wordes as we lerneden of our
dames tonge." He will know how to appreciate Chaucer best
who has come down to him the natural way, through the
meagre pastures of Saxon and ante-Chaucerian poetry.   ...
[p. 489] There is no wisdom that can take place of humanity, and
we find that in Chaucer. We can expand at last in his
breadth... He was worthy to be a citizen of England, while
Petrarch and Boccaccio lived in Italy, and Tell and Tamerlane
in Switzerland and in Asia, and Bruce in Scotland, and
Wickliffe, and Gower, and Edward the Third, and John of
Gaunt, and the Black Prince were his own countrymen as well
as contemporaries; all stout and stirring names.  ... On the
whole, Chaucer impresses us as greater than his reputation.  ...
The affectionate mention which succeeding early poets make
of him, coupling him with Homer and Virgil, is to be taken
into the account in estimating his character and influence.  ...
p. 490] We admire Chaucer for his sturdy English wit.   . . . But
though it [the Prologue] is full of good sense and humanity,
it is not transcendent poetry.  ...
[p. 491] Humor, however broad and genial, takes a narrower view
than enthusiasm. To his own finer vein he added all the
common wit and wisdom of his time.  ... His genius does
not soar like Milton's, but is genial and familiar.  ... The
charm of his poetry consists often only in an exceeding
naturalness, perfect sincerity, with the behaviour of a child
rather than of a man.
Gentleness and delicacy of character are everywhere ap¬
parent in his verse.  ... Nor can we be mistaken respecting
[p. 492] the essential purity of his character, disregarding the apology
of the manners of the age. A simple pathos and feminine
gentleness, which Wordsworth only occasionally approaches
but does not equal, are peculiar to him.  ...
Such pure and genuine and childlike love of Nature is
hardly to be found in any poet.  ...
[p. 493] There are many poets of more taste, and better manners,
who knew how to leave out their dullness, but such negative
genius cannot detain us long: we shall return to Chaucer
still with love.