1835. T., W. I. The Court Magazine in the Fourteenth Century,
[in] The Court Magazine, vol vi, pp. 254-57.
[p. 254] [The writer entering Westminster Abbey, notices one present:]
The individual who excited this interest in me was of
middle stature, somewhat inclined to corpulency, and expen¬
sively attired in a robe of deep purple. His countenance was
placid and benevolent; his eyes, which were large and mild,
were kept constantly upon a richly illuminated missal which
he held in his hand, with the contents of which, however, he
seemed not so deeply busied but that some fleeting and not
very grave thoughts had power ever and anon to diffuse a
satirical but good-natured smile over his face. His com¬
plexion was fair, his forehead broad and smooth, his hair thin
and of silvery whiteness, as was likewise his graceful and
becoming beard.
At length the service concluded, and I took the opportunity
of inquiring of my companion whether he knew the individual
who had so arrested my attention.
“Know him indeed,” quoth Master Scrope, “Marry do I—
and so shalt thou too."...
[After the service the writer and Scrope follow Chaucer
to the house adjacent :]
[p. 255] "Give you good even, Master Geoffrey," said Scrope, "I
have brought a friend with me who loveth the Muse, and
would fain hold a little converse with her favourite son,
Master Geoffrey Chaucer."
Master Geoffrey Chaucer! How the words rang in my
ears–I could scarce return thanks for the kindly welcome
with which the great bard greeted me, so intense was the
delight I experienced at finding myself thus suddenly and
agreeably confronted with him. There before me sat he
whose muse I had so long and so earnestly admired.
. . . . . . . . . .
[Chaucer provides wine, and proceeds :]
" When I have done my reckonings in the Exchequer, I have
gotten a copy of verses to write for my good Lord of Vere, or
my Lady Blanche. Let alone his Majesty himself, who is
ever and anon crying out, ‘Is your muse turned sluggard,
Master Geoffrey, that we hear nought of her faith [sic, for
"i' faith"]!'  I believe they wish me to write every week
a poem as long as the siege of Troy. So my scribe Adam
Scrivener and myself have taken council, and here is our
resolve."
Here he handed to Scrope and myself a slip of parchment,
on which was written as follows :—
"KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS : ON THE 1ST OF
JANUARY IN THE YEAR OF OUR LORD 13— AND IN THE — YEAR
OF THE REIGN OF OUR MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN, KING
RICHARD THE SECOND–WE, GEOFFREY CHAUCER, PURPOSE,
BY THE ASSISTANCE OF OUR TRUSTY SCRIBE, ADAM SCRIVENER,
TO INDITE A GOODLY VOLUME, CONTAINING SUNDRY AND DIVERS
POEMS, SONGS, AND BALLADES BY US THE SAID GEOFFREY
CHAUCER, OUR TRUSTY FRIEND JOHN GOWER, AND OTHERS OF
HIS MAJESTY'S LIEGES; AND WE PURPOSE TO INDITE A SIMILAR
VOLUME UNDER THE TITLE OF
THE COURT MAGAZINE,
EDITED BY
GEOFFREY CHAUCER,
ON THE FIRST DAY OF EVERY MONTH, UNTIL FURTHER NOTICE.
COPIES OF THE SAID VOLUME MAY BE PROCURED OF ADAM
SORIVENER AT OUR HOUSE ABUTTING ON THE ABBEY OF ST.
PETER, WESTMINSTER, AT REASONABLE CHARGES.—GOD SAVE
THE KING.
"Now my masters, to-morrow is the first of January, and
I am going to present my book to his Majesty as a New Year's
Gift–and as Adam Scrivener–plague on him !—is very apt to
make my verses halt like Dame Jukket's dog, I must needs con
over the manuscript before I hand it over to my royal master."
[Chaucer shows them the volume:]
Imprimis, was an address to His Majesty on the New Year,
followed by a translation by Chaucer himself of Petrarch’s
Sonnet “S'amor non è" and which if my memory serves me
rightly, ran much in this strain :—
If no love is, O God what fele I so?
And if love is, what thing and whiche is he?...
"By the blessed Virgin, Master Geoffrey," said Scrope,
[Troilus, i. 400, and two following stanzas.]
" but thou has rendered the Italian poesy into very delectable
English. Thou encounteredst Master Francis Petrarch, didst
not, when thou wentest on the embassy to Genoa?”
Chaucer’s answer was in the affirmative and was a long one,
for it related the history of the interview between the learned
inhabitant of Arqua and Geoffrey Chaucer, poet of Britain,
which interview our readers shall have fully described on some
future occasion.
A French ‘ballade,’ by the "Moral Gower," of which the
'burthen' was
"En toutz errours amour se justifie,"
was the next piece recited by our host, in a style which showed
that his acquaintance with the French language had not been
acquired "at Stratford-le-Bow." When Chaucer had finished
it, he said–
"A book a month is much to do, and I have been fain to
beg for the assistance of my friends, and they have, as you
see, kindly given it to me. Master Gower's is to my fancy a
very choice piece of verse, and this "Dit du Marguerite," by
the gallant French knight Sir John Froissart, is likewise in
good sooth much to my mind. You must come and crack a
bowl with Sir John-he's a merry man, and learned withal.
Oh!–but King Richard will be well pleased to-morrow, for
Sir John's new year's gift to his Majesty will be those chron¬
icles of the affairs of our times, which he has so long busied
himself in compiling.”
"I met Sir John in France," said Scrope, "when I was
with the Count de Foix–but had no converse with him; he
stayed but one night.  ...
" Master Froissart is a good friend of mine," said Chaucer,
"and even now I have just gotten from him a goodly poem,
which has so delighted me, that I purpose putting it into
English rhyme for the amusement of our court dames." So
saying he rose from his chair, and reached from a shelf where¬
on stood more than
Twenty bokes clothed in blake or red,
a beautifully written manuscript, the title of which he recited
as follows :—
" ‘Le Roman de Thesée, ou d’Arcite et Palemon, l'un et
l'autre de Thebes, de royal sang extraits, lesquels etant cousins¬
germains, par superflue amour de la belle Emilie, eurent
ensemble question et débat, l'un desquels à cette occasion perdit
la vie, et l'autre vint à son intencion.’ It is indeed a piteous
story, but if I translate it I think I shall make it somewhat
different and somewhat shorter. But it is a long job, and the
'Romaunt de la Rose' I found a somewhat tedious under¬
taking....
[The writer recites a spurious verse, and asks who com¬
posed it :]
"By my troth, I know not who composed it.... Let him
translate the beautiful Romance of “Le Chevalier au Lion,"
which is making such a coil even now. I showed my copy of
it to a gallant high German knight, who was lately travelling
in these parts, one Master Hartman von der Oue (what out¬
landish names they have in the countries over sea), and he
was so greatly charmed with it, that he straightways made a
copy thereof, and is going incontinent to turn it into his
mother tongue. You shall read a bit of the French poem; it
is a dainty work, by my faith."
The glorious old bard reached down a huge folio from the
shelves which we have already described: and, like all lovers
of poetry, himself read the passages which he had proposed I
should have read. While he was turning over the leaves of
the manuscript, a slip of paper fell from it.... I found that
Chaucer himself had commenced the task he so earnestly
recommended to another. By his permission, I read the few
lines which he had already executed: they were from the com¬
mencement of the Poem*.
Almightie God that made mankyn,
He schilde his servandes out of syn,
And mayntene tham, with might and mayne
That herkens Swayne [sic] and Gawayne:
Thai war knightes of the tabyl rownde,
Tharfore listens a lytel stownde.
[And so for 26 lines further. The dreamer then awakes.]
* Is this the long lost “Book of the Lion"?—W. I. T.