1842. [Barrett, afterwards Browning, Elizabeth Barrett.] The Book of
the Poets, [a review of the anonymous anthology so named (q.v.
above [a. 1841]), in] The Athenæum, 1842, pp. 497-99, 520-22,
558-60, 706-8 728-9. [Reprinted (enlarged) in The Greek Chris¬
tian Poets and the English Poets, 1863.] (Poetical Works, 1890,
6 vols., vol. v, pp. 203-4, 207-17, 226-9, 250-1, 259, 267.)
[p. 498] But it is in Chaucer we touch the true height, and look
abroad into the kingdoms and glories of our poetical literature,
–it is with Chaucer that we begin our ‘Book of the Poets.’
... And the genius of the poet shares the character of his
position: he was made for an early poet, and the metaphors
of dawn and spring doubly become him. A morning-star, a
lark's exaltation, cannot usher in a glory better. The “cheerful
morning face,” “the breezy call of incense-breathing morn,”  you
recognize in his countenance and voice: it is a voice full of
promise and prophecy. He is the good omen of our poetry,
the "good bird," according to the Romans, "the best good
angel of the spring," the nightingale, according to his own
creed of good luck, heard before the cuckoo.
Up rose the sunne, and uprose Emilie,
and uprose her poet, the first of a line of kings, conscious of
futurity in his smile. He is a king and inherits the earth,
and expands his great soul smilingly to embrace his great
heritage. Nothing is too high for him to touch with a thought,
nothing too low to dower with an affection... His senses are
open and delicate, like a young child’s–his sensibilities
capacious of supersensual relations, like an experienced
thinker's. Child-like, too, his tears and smiles lie at the edge
of his eyes, and he is one proof more among the many, that
the deepest pathos and the quickest gaieties hide together in
the same nature ... And because his imagination is neither
too "high fantastical" to refuse proudly the gravitation of the
earth, nor too "light of love" to lose it carelessly, he can
create as well as dream, and work with clay as well as cloud,
–and when his men and women stand close by the actual
ones, your stop-watch shall reckon no difference in the beating
of their hearts. He knew the secret of nature and art,—that
truth is beauty,—and saying "I will make ‘A Wife of Bath’
as well as Emilie, and you shall remember her as long," we do
remember her as long. And he sent us a train of pilgrims,
each with a distinct individuality apart from the pilgrimage,
all the way from Southwark and the Tabard Inn, to Canterbury
and Becket's shrine; and their laughter comes never to an end,
and their talk goes on with the stars, and all the railroads
which may intersect the spoilt earth for ever, cannot hush the
"tramp, tramp" of their horses' feet.
[More on Chaucer's versification, the supposed quarrel with
Gower, etc.]