1841. Wordsworth, William. Letter to Henry Reed of Philadelphia,
[printed in] Memoirs of William Wordsworth, by Christopher
Wordsworth, 1851, 2 vols., vol. ii, p. 373-5. (Letters of the
Wordsworth Family, ed. W. Knight, vol. iii, p. 218.)
There has recently been published in London a volume
of some of Chaucer's tales and poems modernised. This little
specimen originated in what I attempted with the ‘Prioress's
Tale’; and if the book should find its way to America, you
will see in it two further specimens from myself. I had no
further connection with the publication than by making a
present of these to one of the contributors [Powell; see
above, 1840, Wordsworth]. Let me, however, recommend
to your notice the ‘Prologue,’ and the ‘Franklin's Tale’;
they are both by Mr. Horne, a gentleman unknown to me,
but are, the latter in particular, very well done. Mr. Leigh
Hunt has not failed in the 'Manciple's Tale,' which I myself
modernised many years ago; but, though I much admire
the genius of Chaucer as displayed in this performance, I
could not place my version at the disposal of the editor, as
I deemed the subject somewhat too indelicate, for pure taste,
to be offered to the world at this time of day. Mr. Horne
has much hurt this publication by not abstaining from the
'Reve's Tale'; this, after making all allowance for the rude
manners of Chaucer's age, is intolerable, and by indispensably
softening down the incidents, he has killed the spirit of that
humour, gross and farcical, that pervades the original. When
the work was first mentioned to me, I protested as strongly as
possible against admitting any coarseness or indelicacy; so
that my conscience is clear of countenancing aught of that kind.
So great is my admiration of Chaucer's genius, and so profound
my reverence for him as an instrument in the hands of
Providence for spreading the light of literature through his
native land, that, notwithstanding the defects and faults of
this publication, I am glad of it, as a means for making many
acquainted with the original who would otherwise be ignorant
of everything about him but his name.