1836. Southey, Robert. Sketch of the Progress of English Poetry from
Chaucer to Cowper, [in] The Works of William Cowper, with a
life of the author by the editor, Robert Southey, 1835-7, 15 vols.,
vol. ii, 1836, pp. 114-121, 134-5, 148-9, 177.
[vol. ii,
p. 114]
The first reformation which it [vernacular poetry] under¬
went was to free it from some gratuitous difficulties, and divest
it of the cumbrous ornaments with which it had been over¬
loaded. Chaucer, who is deservedly accounted the Father of
English Poetry, effected this...
[p.115] Father Chaucer, throwing off all trammels, simplified our
verse. Nature had given him the ear and the eye and the
imagination of a poet; and his diction was such as that of all
great poets has ever been, and ever will be, in all countries,—
neither cramped by pedantic rules... nor drooping for want
of strength, but rising and falling with the subject, and always
suited to it.
The seven-lined stanza of his Troilus and Cresseide [foot¬
note, quoting Sidney's praise in the Defence of Poesy] was
adopted from the Provenceal [sic] poets. I know not whether
he had any example of the ten-syllable couplet in the poets of
France, Provence, and Italy, but the Hermit of Hampole,
Richard Rolle,... had shown him the way in this. That
the one form of verse was, in his judgement, as well fitted for
grave and lofty subjects as the other, is certain, for in such
subjects he has employed them both: but it appears that the
couplet took its character in common opinion from his lighter
pieces, and was supposed to be adapted for nothing better.
And while the “Troilus verse," as King James called it,
obtained the dignified title of Rhythm Royal, [footnote,
quoting Puttenham, Art of English Poetry, on the metre of
[p. 116] Troilus and “riding rhyme"] the strain in which the knight
related his tale of Palamon and Arcite, and in which “ the
story of Cambuscan bold" had been pitched, was degraded
in public estimation, and distinguished by the contemptuous
term of riding rhymes. [Footnote: Perhaps Shakespeare
alludes to this appellation when he describes a still more
familiar kind of measure, as the "right butter-woman's rate
to market."]
It is a disputed question whether Chaucer's verses be
rhythmical or metrical. I believe them to have been written
[p. 117] rhythmically, upon the same principle on which Coleridge
composed his beautiful fragment of Christabel,—that the
number of beats, or accentuated syllables in every line should
be the same, although the number of syllables themselves might
vary. [Footnote, stating that James Boswell (the younger) had
impugned that opinion, but that in it Southey had the sup¬
port of Farmer and Dr. Nott, who, he thought, had established
the point. He also quotes Gascoigne in this connexion.
See above, 1831, and, for Nott, above, 1815-16.] Verse
so composed will often be strictly metrical; and because
Chaucer's is frequently so, the argument has been raised that
it is always so if it be read properly... But to suppose that
it was written as iambic verse, and that the lines were
lengthened or shortened to the required measure by some¬
times pronouncing a final syllable, and sometimes letting it
[p. 118] remain mute,... is supposing that Chaucer took greater
liberties with the common pronunciation (which must
always be uniform) and relied more on the judgement of the
reader, than one who so perfectly understood the character of
his mother tongue, and was so well acquainted with the
ordinary capacities of men, can be supposed to have done,
without impeachment of his sagacity. Be this as it may, it is
no slight proof of that sagacity, that he should have pitched
the key and determined the length of verse, which... have
been found to accord best with the genius of the language;
and that his "riding rhyme," under the more dignified
denomination of the “heroic couplet,” should be the measure
which Dryden and Pope and their followers have preferred to
all others for grave and lofty subjects.
The “ornate style," which is the worst fashion that has ever
been introduced into English verse, began in Chaucer's time,
and he adopted it in some of his smaller and later pieces; per¬
haps as an experiment towards the improvement of a language
then in a state in which experiments might allowably be tried,
.... but unless his faculties were impaired by age, of which
there is no proof or indication, it is not possible that he could
have approved of it himself. His language was what he had
learnt in the country, in the city, and in the court... what
every one could understand, and every one could feel; it was
the language of passion and of real life, and therefore the
language of poetry.  ...
[p. 119] The age after Chaucer was in many respects darker than
that which preceded it; his name, however, was held in
reverence, and succeeding poets were instructed to look to him
as their exemplar.
[p.120]  From Chaucer's time the line of five feet (whether in coup¬
lets or in stanzas) has been the most approved measure.
[p.121] Neither the diction of Chaucer, nor of Surrey,.. the
father and the reformer of our poetry,.. could have been more
perfect than it was. It will not be supposed that because
Surrey is thus named with Chaucer, he is placed in the same
rank with him; for Chaucer stands in the first rank, with
Spenser, Shakespeare, and Milton; and in variety of power
Shakespeare is his only peer.
[p. 134] [Reference to Dryden’s metre in his modernization of
Chaucer.]
[pp.148- [Remarks on the schemes, of 1777, of John Bell and rival
149]
publishers for producing an edition of the Poets of Great
Britain, from Chaucer to Churchill. Bell’s edition comprised
only three writers before Cowley, viz., Chaucer, Spenser and
Donne, and on this point Southey observes:] it is not to the
honour of our country that his collection, which was a mere
bookseller's affair... should still contain the only convenient
and most complete edition of the works of the great father
of English poetry.
[p. 177] In one of his first poems, Mason had in a puerile fiction,
ranked Chaucer and Spenser and Milton below Pope, which is
like comparing a garden shrub with the oaks of the forest.
But he would have maintained no such absurdity in his
riper years.