1846. Landor, Walter Savage. Imaginary Conversations, [in] Works,
1846, vol. i, pp. 337, 402-8; vol. ii, pp. 164-7, 229. (Imaginary
Conversations, ed. C. G. Crump, 1891, 6 vols., vol. iii, pp. 159,
352, 389, 394; vol. iv, pp. 66-108, 239, 274-5, 283; vol. vi,
p. 45n.)
[There was no Chaucer allusion in the 1st edn., 1824, and only a very few insig¬
nificant ones in the 2nd, 1826; for the 1st edn. of Chaucer, Boccaccio, Petrarca, see
above, 1827.]
[vol. vi,
p. 45 n.]
LANDOR, ENGLISH VISITER [sic], AND FLORENTINE VISITER.
Landor.  ... Since the time of Chaucer there have only
been two poets who at all resemble him; and these two are
widely dissimilar one from the other, Burns and Keats. The
accuracy and truth with which Chaucer has described the
manners of common life, with the fore-ground and back-ground,
aro also to be found in Burns, who delights in broader strokes
of external nature, but equally appropriate. He has parts
of genius which Chaucer has not in the same degree; the
animated and pathetic. Keats, in his Endymion, is richer in
imagery than either.
[vol. iv,  [Chaucer, Boccaccio, and Petrarca, slightly enlarged from
[This passage is not in the 1st edn. of 1829.]
pp. 66¬
108] the first edition of 1829.]
SOUTHEY AND LANDOR.
[p. 274]  Landor.  ... Keats is the most imaginative of our poets
after Chaucer, Spenser, Shakspeare, and Milton.
Southey. I am glad you admit my favourite, Spenser.
Landor. He is my favourite too, if you admit the expression
without the signification of precedency. I do not think
him equal to Chaucer even in imagination, and he appears
to me very inferior to him in all other points, excepting
harmony. Here the miscarriage is in Chaucer's age, not in
Chaucer, many of whose verses are highly beautiful, but never
(as in Spenser) one whole period. I love the geniality of his
temperature: no straining, no effort, no storm, no fury. His
vivid thoughts burst their way to us through the coarsest
integuments of language.  ... Chaucer first united the two
glorious realms of Italy and England. Shakspeare came
after, and subjected the whole universe to his dominion.
But he mounted the highest steps of his throne under those
[p. 275] bland skies which had warmed the congenial breasts of
Chaucer and Boccaccio. [Chaucer's and Shakespeare’s powers
of imagination greater than Spenser's.]
[Some brief remarks follow on Dryden’s criticism of Chaucer's
metre and his comparison of Chaucer with Boccaccio.]
[p. 283  Southey [to Landor]... It is hard upon Milton, and
harder still upon inferior poets, that every expression of his
used by a predecessor should be noted as borrowed or stolen.
Here in v. 822,
Will bathe the drooping spirits in delight
is traced to several, and might be traced to more. Chaucer,
in whose songs it is more beautiful than elsewhere, writes,
His harte bathed in a bath of blisse.
Probably he took the idea from the bath of knights. You
could never have seen Chaucer nor the rest when you wrote
those verses at Rugby on Godiva.  ...