1845] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 265
Thirdly, Chaucer's poetry has been presented in its own
proper form, with a modernized spelling, and an accented
pronunciation. Eventually, perhaps, this will be the method
permanently adopted for all popular editions of the poet; but,
at present, such books attract neither the student nor the
general reader: too lax for the one, they still remain¬
apparently—too irksome for the other.
In the following pages we have endeavoured to combine the
peculiar advantages offered by the two methods last named,
and to get rid of their drawbacks. We have proposed to
ourselves to make the whole course of the story clear by
resolving inconvenient or difficult passages of the poetry into
[p. 7] constantly refreshing himself from the "well of English
prose; but, at the same time, to allow the reader to be
undefiled," by leaving all the remainder, including the finest
portions of the poetry, in its own nervous and beautiful
language...
[p. 11] [Specimen of the rendering of the Knightes Tale:]
Once, as old stories tell, there was a duke named Theseus,
the lord and governor of Athens, and who, in his time, was
such a conqueror, that there was not a greater under the sun.
He had won many a rich country. With his wisdom and
his chivalry, he conquered all the realm of the Amazons that
was formerly called Scythia,—
And wedded the freshe queen Hypolita,
and brought her, and also her young sister Emily, home with
him to his own country, with much glory and great solemnity.
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. 15] When that this worthy duke, this Theseus, hath slain Creon
and won Thebes,
Still in the field he took all night his rest.
[p. 16] And he did as he pleased with all the country. After the
battle and discomfiture, the pillers did their business; they
ransacked the heap of dead bodies, in order to strip them of
their armour and garments. And it so befell that they found
in the heap, pierced through with many a bloody grievous
wound, two young knights, lying by each other, in the same
kind of armour, which was full richly wrought. Of these two,
one was named Arcite, the other Palamon,
Not fully quick nor fully dead they were;
But by their coat armóur, and by their gear,
