1845-7. Saunders, John. Canterbury Tales from Chaucer, 2 vols.
Vol. i is one of "Knight's Weekly Volumes"; vol. ii, 1847, was
published by C. Cox. The series which appeared in the Penny
Magazine, 1845 (q.v. immediately above), only contains a few
sentences of the preface, and the extracts and prose summaries
differ throughout. Of the contents of vol. ii, 1847, only the
1st-4th Tales had appeared in the Penny Magazine. For the
revised edn. of 1889, see above, the same author’s Cabinet Pictures
of English Life: Chaucer, 1845.]
[vol. i,  Three different modes have been adopted by the lovers of
p. 5]
Chaucer in their attempts to popularize his works.
First, they have modernized his poetry; that is to say,
re-written it, as poetry. Now, whenever a man shall arise
possessing exactly the same powers, views, tastes, and individual
characteristics as the great father of our literature, and will
undertake to give us a new version of the Canterbury Tales,
we have no doubt the task may be satisfactorily accomplished,
and not till then.  ...
[p. 6]  Secondly, the poetical has been transformed into a prose
narration; and thus the story, at least, has been freed from
the difficulties and hindrances caused by antiquated words or
pronunciations; but then it has necessarily been relieved at
the same time from all the subtler elements of the poetry.  ...
Thirdly, Chaucer's poetry has been presented in its own
proper form, with a modernized spelling, and an accented
pronunciation. Eventually, perhaps, this will be the method
permanently adopted for all popular editions of the poet; but,
at present, such books attract neither the student nor the
general reader: too lax for the one, they still remain¬
apparently—too irksome for the other.
In the following pages we have endeavoured to combine the
peculiar advantages offered by the two methods last named,
and to get rid of their drawbacks. We have proposed to
ourselves to make the whole course of the story clear by
resolving inconvenient or difficult passages of the poetry into
[p. 7] constantly refreshing himself from the "well of English
prose; but, at the same time, to allow the reader to be
undefiled," by leaving all the remainder, including the finest
portions of the poetry, in its own nervous and beautiful
language...
[p. 11] [Specimen of the rendering of the Knightes Tale:]
Once, as old stories tell, there was a duke named Theseus,
the lord and governor of Athens, and who, in his time, was
such a conqueror, that there was not a greater under the sun.
He had won many a rich country. With his wisdom and
his chivalry, he conquered all the realm of the Amazons that
was formerly called Scythia,—
And wedded the freshe queen Hypolita,
and brought her, and also her young sister Emily, home with
him to his own country, with much glory and great solemnity.
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. 15] When that this worthy duke, this Theseus, hath slain Creon
and won Thebes,
Still in the field he took all night his rest.
[p. 16] And he did as he pleased with all the country. After the
battle and discomfiture, the pillers did their business; they
ransacked the heap of dead bodies, in order to strip them of
their armour and garments. And it so befell that they found
in the heap, pierced through with many a bloody grievous
wound, two young knights, lying by each other, in the same
kind of armour, which was full richly wrought. Of these two,
one was named Arcite, the other Palamon,
Not fully quick nor fully dead they were;
But by their coat armóur, and by their gear,
the heralds knew them well, as those who were of the royal
blood of Thebes, and born of two sisters. [&c., &e.]
[Then follow:
The Man of Law's Tale,
The Wife of Bath's Tale,
The Freres Tale,
The Clerkes Tale,
with "Remarks" on each at the end.
Vol. II:
The Squieres Tale,
The Frankeleyns Tale,
The Second Nonnes Tale,
The Pardoners Tale
The Chanouns Yemannes
The Prioresses Tale,
The Nonne Prestes Tale,
The Maunciples Tale,
Tale,
The Phisiciens Tale;
and selections from:
The Milleres Tale,
The Reves Tale,
The Marchantes Tale,
The Shipmannes Tale.
Concluding remarks on Chaucer's essential morality, with
special reference to the Frankeleyns Tale, and on his achieve¬
ment as restorer of learning and founder of our language and
literature.]
Each Tale is also followed by "Remarks," and is illustrated
by the woodcut which appeared in The Penny Magazine, q.v.
above, 1845, Saunders.]