1841. D'Israeli, Isaac. Amenities of Literature, vol. i, pp. 34, 115n.
117-19, 164, 182-3. 191n., 198, 201, 215, 217-18, 236n., 252-82
[article on Chaucer], 286, 291-4, 302-5, 308-12, 314-16n., 320,
347, 369; vol. ii, pp. 30-31, 83, 112, 114, 254, 366, 376; vol. iii,
pp. 3-4.
[vol. i,
p. 265]
The creative faculty in Chaucer had not broken forth
in his translations, which evidently were his earliest writings.
The native bent of his genius, the hilarity of his temper,
betrays itself by playful strokes of raillery and concealed
satire when least expected. His fine irony may have some¬
times left his commendations, or even the objects of his
[p. 266] admiration, in a very ambiguous condition... Our poet
has stamped with his immortal ridicule the tale told in his
own person–“The Rime of Sir Thopas."
[p. 268] Yet humour and irony are not his only excellencies, for
those who study Chaucer know that this great poet has
thoughts that dissolve in tenderness; no one has more skil¬
fully touched the more hidden springs of the heart.
The Herculean labour of CHAUCER was the creation of a
new style. In this he was as fortunate as he was likewise
unhappy. He mingled with the native rudeness of our
English, words of Provençal fancy, and some of French and
of Latin growth. He banished the superannuated and the
uncouth, and softened the churlish nature of our hard Anglo¬
Saxon; but the poet had nearly endangered the novel diction
when his artificial pedantry assumed what he called "the
ornate style" in the “Romaunt of the Rose,” and in his
"Troilus and Cressida."
 . . . . . . . . . . .
[p. 269] We have, however, a glorious evidence amid this struggle
both with a new and with a false style, of Chaucer's native good
taste; he finally wholly abandoned this artificial diction; and
his later productions, no longer disfigured by such tortured
phrases and such remote words, awaken our sympathy in the
familiar language of life and passion.
TYRWHIT has ingeniously constructed a metrical system to
arrange the versification to the ear of a modern reader...
He maintained that the lines were regular decasyllables.
But who can read this poet for any length, even the
Canterbury Tales, in the elaborated text of Tyrwhit, without
[p. 270] being reminded of its fallacy? Even the E final, on which our
critic has laid such stress, though often sounded, assuredly is
sometimes mute. Dan Chaucer makes at his pleasure words
long or short, dissyllabic or trisyllabic; and this he has
himself told us–
" But for the rime is light and lewde,
Yet make it somewhat agréable,
Though some verse fail in a sylláble."
in his later work, the Tales; but it is evident that Chaucer
... The verse of Chaucer seems more carefully regulated
trusted his cadences to his ear, and his verse is therefore
usually rhythmical, and accidentally metrical.
 . . . . . . . . . . .
[p. 272] Are the works of our great poet to be consigned to the literary
dungeon of the antiquary's closet? I fear that there is more
than one obstruction which intervenes between the poet’s
name, which will never die, and the poet’s works, which will
never be read. A massive tome, dark with the Gothic type,
whose obsolete words and difficult phrases, and, for us,
uncadenced metre, are to be conned by a glossary as obsolete
as the text, to be perpetually referred to, to the interruption
of all poetry and all patience, appalled even the thorough¬
paced antiquary, Samuel Pegge, as appears by his honest
confession [q.v. above, vol. i, p. 502]. Already a practised
bibliosopher proclaims, alluding to the edition by Tyrwhit
of Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales, "And who reads any
other portion of the poet?" Yet the Canterbury Tales
are but the smallest portion of Chaucer's works! But
some skilful critics have perpended and decided differently;
even among the projected labours of Johnson was an edition
[p. 273] of Chaucer’s works, and Godwin, when diligently occupied on
this great poet, with just severity observed that "a vulgar
judgment had been propagated by slothful and indolent
persons, that the Canterbury Tales are the only part of the
works of Chaucer worthy the attention of a modern reader,
and this has contributed to the wretched state in which his
works are permitted to exist."
 . . . . . . . . . . .
[p. 274] It is true that the language of Chaucer has failed, but not
the writer. The marble which Chaucer sculptured has be¬
trayed the noble hand of the artist; the statue was finished;
but the grey and spotty veins came forth, clouding the lucid
whiteness.
For the poet or the poetical, the difficulty of the language may
be surmounted with a reasonable portion of everyday patience.
 . . . . . . . . . . .
[p. 277] Ogle, with others, attempted to modernise Chaucer; but it
is as impossible to give such a version of Chaucer as to translate
the Odes of Horace.