1841. [De Quincey, Thomas.] Homer and the Homeridæ, [in] Black¬
wood's Edinburgh Magazine, Dec. 1841, vol. l, pp. 747-9, 751.
(Collected Writings, ed. D. Masson, 1889-90, 14 vols., vol. vi,
pp. 69-73, 78.)
[p. 69] Precisely on this very summer day, so bright and brilliant,
of 1841, are the five hundred years completed (less by
forty-five years than the interspace between Homer and Pisis¬
[p. 70] tratus) since Chaucer was a stout boy, “alive,” and probably
"kicking"; for he was fined about 1341 for kicking a
Franciscan friar in Fleet Street, though Ritson erroneously
asserts that the story was a "hum," invented by Chatterton.
Now, what was the character of Chaucer's diction? A great
delusion exists on that point. Some ninety or one hundred
words that are now obsolete, certainly not many more, vein
the whole surface of Chaucer; and thus a primâ  facie im¬
pression is conveyed that Chaucer is difficult to understand:
whereas a very slight practice familiarises his language.
The Canterbury Tales were not made public till 1380; but
the composition was certainly proceeding between 1350
and 1380, and before 1360 some considerable parts were
published. Here we have a space greater by thirty-five years
than that between Homer and Pisistratus. And observe–
had Chaucer’s Tales enjoyed the benefit of an oral recitation,
were they assisted to the understanding by the pauses in one
place, the hurrying and crowding of unimportant words at
another, and by the proper distribution of emphasis every¬
where... there is no man, however unfamiliar with old
English, but might be made to go along with the movement
of his admirable tales, though he might still remain at a loss
for the meaning of insulated words.
Not Chaucer himself, however, but that model of language
which Chaucer ridicules and parodies, as becoming obsolete in
his days, the rhyme of Sir Thopas-a model which may be
safely held to represent the language of the two centuries
previous-is the point of appeal. Sir Thopas is clearly a
parody of the Metrical Romances. Some of those hitherto
published by Ritson, &c., are not older than Chaucer; but
some ascend much higher, and may be referred to 1200, or
perhaps earlier. Date them from 1240, and that places a
period of six centuries complete between ourselves and them.
Notwithstanding which the greater part of the Metrical
Romances, when aided by the connection of events narrated,
[p. 71] or when impassioned, remain perfectly intelligible to this
hour.
. . . . . . . . . . .
[p. 73] There is also a philosophic reason, why the range of diction
in Chaucer should be much wider, and liable to greater changes
than that of Homer. Review those parts of Chaucer which
at this day are most obscure, and it will uniformly be found
that they are the subjective sections of his poetry; those, for
instance, in which he is elaborately decomposing a character.
A character is a subtle fugacious essence which does, or does
not, exist according to the capacity of the eye which is applied
to it    In Homer's age, no such meditative differences were
perceived. All is objective in the descriptions and external.
. . . . . . . . . . .
[p. 78] Chaucer also, whom Dryden in this point so thoroughly
misunderstood, was undoubtedly a most elaborate master of
metre, as will appear when we have a really good edition of
him.