1841] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Horne.] 237
has, of course, been always, that of his obsolete dialect; but
one of the main causes of his poems remaining so long with¬
out modernizing (for they have hitherto been only para¬
phrased in a very free manner), is because they are all in
rhyme. Here begins the first and most trying difficulty in
[p. x] rendering his poems available to the public of the present
time. To translate his poems into blank verse, would be
losing a characteristic feature of the original; to give the
rhymes he uses is often impossible, because the words them¬
selves, or the grammatical structure of the terminations are
obsolete; to substitute rhymes of similar quantity and sound
can seldom be successfully accomplished, because it has a
tendency, when you are struggling to obtain the sense of the
passage, to induce a mechanical awkwardness; and to supply
new rhymes generally requires that a whole line, if not the
couplet, must be changed in rhythm or totally remodelled.
In the attempts, therefore, which have been hitherto made
(with the exception of two of the Tales, modernized by Lord
Thurlow and Mr. Wordsworth) the whole substantial material
of Chaucer has been left as it stood, and the leading ideas only
being adopted, a new poem has been written with more or less
ability and verisimilitude, according to the genius and talent
of the individual and the principle on which he proceeded.
The versions of Chaucer which have been given by Dryden
[p. xi] and Pope, are elaborate and highly finished productions, read¬
ing exactly like their own poems, and not bearing the slightest
resemblance to Chaucer. Even his finest lines and couplets
which often require little or nothing more than a change in
the orthography, have scarcely ever been retained. Every¬
thing was paraphrased, made fluent, sounding, and full of
"effects"; though it is equally true, that Chaucer occasionally
received a very noble present from Dryden, for which nothing
more than a suggestion is traceable in the original. Their
versions of several of the Canterbury Tales, bearing the dates
of 1699 and 1711, were subsequently adopted by Ogle,
together with some of his own, and of sundry other writers,
and published in three volumes in 1741. The same versions,
[p. xii] with additions, were collected by Lipscombe, and published
in 1795. As it is impossible to praise these editions for any
resemblance to the original, it would be far more agreeable
to pass them without further remark; but our readers will
naturally expect some proofs in support of the judgment
