
148 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1598
Corrections of some faults and Annotations vpon some
places, sign. Bbbb iij-vij b.
[See note under 1532, Thynne, above, p. 78, also under 1597, Beaumont, pp. 145-6.
For a complete reprint of Speght's Life of Chaucer, see Chaucer, a bibliographical
manual, by E. P. Hammond, N. York, 1908, pp. 19-85.]
[sign. a ii b-a iii]
To the Readers.
Some few yeers past, I was requested by certaine Gentlemen
my neere friends, who loued Chaucer, as he well deserueth; to
take a little pains in reuiuing the memorie of so rare a man, as
also in doing some reparations on his works, which they iudged
to be much decaied by iniurie of time, ignorance of writers, and
negligence of Printers. For whose sakes thus much was then
by me undertaken, although neuer as yet fully finished.
[Speght gives a list of the work he has done, much the same
as on title page]. As that little which then was done, was
done for those priuat friends, so was it neuer my mind that
it should be published. But so it fell out of late, that Chaucers
Works being in the Presse, and three parts thereof alreadie
printed, not only these friends did by their Letters sollicit
me, but certaine also of the best in the Companie of Stationers
hearing of these Collections, came vnto me, and for better or
worse, would have something done in this Impression. [Speght
then apologises for the faultiness of his additional matter, on
the score of its not having been originally intended for publi¬
cation, and also because he was hurried over it.].... I
earnestly entreat al to accept these my endeuours in best part,
as wel in regard of mine owne well meaning, as for the desert
of oure English Poet himselfe: who in most vnlearned times
and greatest ignorance, being much esteemed, cannot in these
our daies, wherein Learning and riper iudgement so much
flourisheth, but be had in great reuerence, vnlesse it bee of such
as for want of wit and learning, were neuer yet able to iudge
vhat wit or Learning meaneth .....
1598. B. H. The Reader to Geffrey Chaucer. A short poem in praise of
the editor, in Speght’s first edn. of Chaucer's works, signed H. B.,
sign. [a v b].
The Reader to Geffrey Chaucer.
Rea[der]
Where hast thow dwelt, good Geffrey, al this while
Unknowne to vs, saue only by thy bookes?
