
76 [Pynson] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1526-
1526. Pynson, Richard. Prohemye [to the Canterbury tales in his edn.
of Chaucer's works. See above], sign. a i b. Colophon to Assemble of
Foules, sign. d ij. Title to La bell dame sauns mercy, sign. d ij b.
Colophon to La bell dame and Title to Morall proverbes, sign. e iij b.
(The 'prohemye' is really Caxton's, c. 1483 (q. v. pp. 51-3) with slight variations of
spelling and an omission between "wherin he fynysshyth thys sayd booke" and
"as here after alle alonge by thayde of almyghty god," where Pynson has inserted
the following:]
Whiche boke is dyligently and trewly corrected by a copy
of Willyam Caxtons imprintyng according to the true makinge
of the sayd Geffray Chaucer.
[On sign. c iij of the Boke of Fame (bound up with the Canterbury tales), Pynson
has inserted Caxton's epilogue to the same, c. 1483 (q. v. p. 61).]
[sign. d ij] Thus endeth the assemble of Foules otherwyse called
saynt Valentynes day compyled by the famous clerke Geffray
Chaucer.
(sign. d ij b] This boke called la bele Dame Sauns mercy was translate
out of Frenche in to Englysshe by Geffray Chaucer flour of
poetes in our mother tong.
[sign. e iij b] Thus endeth the boke called La bell dame sauns mercy:
And here foloweth certayne morall prouerbes of the foresayd
Geffray Chaucers doyng.
[Although these 'moral proverbs' are in this colophon wrongly ascribed to Chaucer,
they are yet correctly headed 'Morall prouerbes of Christyne' on sign. e fiij. See,
on this point, Chaucer, a bibliographical manual, by E. P. Hammond, N. York, 1908,
p. 115.]
1530. Here foloweth the Assemble of foules.... compyled by
the preclared and famous Clerke Geffray Chaucer Imprynted
in london.... by me Wynkyn de Worde 1530.
[Unique(?) copy at Britwell. See for an account of this book Ames's Typo¬
graphical Antiquities, ed. T. F. Dibdin, 1810-12, vol. ii, pp. 278-80.]
1530. Copland, Robert. Robert Coplande boke prynter to new fanglers
and Lenuoy of R. Coplande boke prynter. Verses in Wynkyn de
Worde's Assemble of foules [see last entry]. (Quoted in a letter of
John Billam, 1786, in Ames's Typographical Antiquities, ed. T. F.
Dibdin, 1810-12, vol. ii, pp. 279-80. See below, 1786.)
Chaucer is deed the which this pamphlete wrate
So ben his heyres in all suche besynesse
And gone is also the famous clerke Lydgate
And so is yonge Hawes, god theyr soules adresse
Many were the volumes that they made more and les
Theyr bokes ye lay up, tyll that the lether moules
But yet for your myndes this boke I wyll impresse
That is in tytule the parlament of foules
