
130 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1587-
[sign. D iii]
Let thinges that are faigned for pleasures sake haue a neer
resemblance of the truth. This precept may you perceiue to
bee most duelie obserued of Chawcer: for who could with
more delight prescribe such wholsome counsaile and sage
aduise, where he seemeth onelie to respect the profitte of his
lessons and instructions? or who coulde with greater wisedome,
or more pithie skill, vnfold such pleasant and delightsome
matters of mirth, as though they respected nothing but the
telling of a merry tale? so that this is the very grounde of
right poetrie, to give profitable counsaile, yet so as it must be
mingled with delight.
1587. Churchyard, Thomas. The Worthiness of Wales. An Introduc¬
tion for Breaknoke Shiere, sign. H 1 b. (Reprint of edn. of 1587,
Spenser soc., 1876, p. 62.)
If Ouids skill I had, or could like Homer write,
Or Dant would make thy muses glad, to please yᵉ worlds delite,
Or Chawser lent me in these daies, some of his learned tales,
As Petrarke did his Lawra praise, so would I speake of Wales.
1588. Fraunce, Abraham. The Lawiers Logike... Imprinted by W.
How, 1588, fol. 27.
The like absurditie would it bee for a man of our age to
affectate such wordes as were quite worne out at heeles and
elbowes long before the natiuitie of Geffrey Chawcer.
1589. Greene, Robert. Menaphon, sign. F 2 b. (Greene’s Works, ed.
A. B. Grosart, Huth library, 1881-6, vol. vi, 1881-3, p. 86.)
The Reports of the Shepheards.
Whosoeuer Samela descanted of that loue, tolde you a
Canterbury tale.
1589. [Nashe, Thomas.] To the Gentlemen Students of both Vniuersities.
Introduction to Greene’s Menaphon, sign. A 2. (Ed. E. Arber, 1895,
pp. 15, 16. Works of Thomas Nashe, ed. R. B. McKerrow, 1904-5,
vol, iii, 1905, p. 322.)
... Tut saies our English Italians, the finest witts our
Climate sends foorth, are but drie braind doltes, in comparison
of other countries: whome if you interrupt with redde rationem,
they will tell you of Petrache, Tasso, Celiano, with an infinite
number of others; to whome if I should oppose Chaucer,
Lidgate, Gower, with such like, that liued vnder the tirranie of
ignorance, I do think their best louers, would bee much dis¬
contented, with the collation of contraries, if I should write
ouer al their heads, Haile fellow well met–One thing I am
sure of, that each of these three, haue vaunted their meeters,
