
106 [Foxe] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1570
Chaucer that the Bishoppes condemnyng and abolishyng al maner of
a right
Englishe bookes and treatises, which might bryng the people
Wick-
leuian.
to any light of knowledge, did yet authorise the woorkes of
Chaucers Chaucer to remayne still & to be occupyed : Who (no doubt)
bokes.
saw in Religion as much almost, as euen we do now, and
vttereth in hys works no lesse, and semeth to be a right
Wicleuian, or els was neuer any, and that all his workes
almost, if they be throughly aduised will testifie (albeit it bee
done in myrth, & couertly) & especially the latter ende of hys
thyrd booke of the Testament of loue: for there purely he
toucheth the highest matter, that is the Communion. Wherin,
excepte a man be altogether blynd, he may espye him at the
full. Althoughe in the same booke (as in all other he vseth
to do) vnder shadows couertly, as vnder a visoure he suborneth
truth, in such sorte, as both priuely she may profite the godly-
minded, and yet not be espyed of the craftye aduersarie. And
therefore the Byshops, belike, takyng hys workes but for iestes
and toyes, in condemnyng other bookes, yet permitted his
bookes to be read.
So it pleased God to blinde then the eyes of them, for the
Men brought  more commoditie of his people, to the entent that through the
to truth readyng of his treatises, some fruite might redound therof to
by read-
ing Chau-  his Churche, as no doubt, it dyd to many: As also I am
cers
workes, partlye informed of certeine, whiche knewe the parties, which
to them reported, that by readyng of Chausers workes, they
were brought to the true knowledge of Religion. And not
unlike to be true. For to omitte other partes of his volume,
whereof some are more fabulous than other, what tale can bee
more playnely tolde, then the talke of the ploughman? or
what finger can pointe out more directly the Pope with his
Prelates to be Antichrist then doth the poore Pellycan reason¬
The
yng agaynst the gredy Griffon? Under whiche Hypotyposis
plough-
or Poesie, who is so blind that seeth not by the Pellicane,
mans
tale in
Chauser.  the doctrine of Christ, and of the Lollardes to bee defended
agaynst the Churche of Rome? Or who is so impudent that
can denye that to be true, which the Pellicans there affirmeth
in describyng the presumptuous pride of that pretensed
[p. 966] Church? Agayne vhat egge can be more lyke, or figge vnto
an other, then ye words, properties, and conditions of that
rauenyng Griphe resembleth the true Image, that is, the
nature & qualities of that which we call the Churche of Rome,
