
15811 Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 121
I might thaire reade the greate and actyve chyuelvie;
Betwene yᵉ Troyaine knightes, and yᵉ Greekes all;
Chawcer nor Gowere was neuer of more antiquitie
In proise or miter, with theire Englisshe literall,
Thaire ortographia, stile, nor syllapes in especiall:
(Whiche Iyghtned my harte the enterpryse for to take)
Than was master Iydgaite in the verses he did make.
That tedyous tyme he haithe discouered out at lardge:
In englysshe verse, right plesaunde to the eare;
Shewinge all the Pamfylie thaire haitered and rage,
Under blossomes of rethoricke, yᵉ style it shoulde not dere:
Off whoose pretence thoo I, maisters, may not come nere:
To attempte suche eloquence in als wightye a matter;
Made me take on hande yᵉ Iyke, to followe at laser.
HcsiI] sidney, Sir Philip. An Apologie for Poetrie, written by the
right noble, vertuous, and learned, Sir Phillip Sidney Knight.
Printed for Henry Olney, 1595, sign. B ii b, D iiib, D iv, Giv, I iv.
(English Reprints, ed. E. Arber, 1869, pp. 21, 34, 51, 62)
(mign. B So in the Italian language, the first that made it aspire
uib. p.
ail
to be a Treasure-house of Science, were the Poets Dante,
Boccace, and Petrarch. So in our English were Gouer and
Chawcer.
After whom, encouraged and delighted with theyr excellent
fore-going, others haue followed, to beautifie our mother tongue,
as wel in the same kinde as in other Arts...
. . . . . . . . . . .
Isign. D See whether wisdome and temperance in Vlisses and
Mb, P.
34
Diomedes, valure in Achilles, friendship in Nisus, and Eurialus,
isign. D euen to an ignoraunt man, carry not an apparent shyning: and
ivi
contrarily, the remorse of conscience in Oedipus, the soone
repenting pride in Agamemnon, the selfe-deuouring crueltie
in his Father Atreus, the violence of ambition in the two
Theban brothers, the sowre-sweetnes of reuenge in Medœa,
and to fall lower, the Terentian Gnato, and our Chaucer's
Pandar, so exprest, that we nowe vse their names to signifie
their trades.....
. . . . . . . . . ..
ssmn. ° Thirdly, that it [Poetry] is the Nurse of abuse, infecting
iv, p.
sn
vs with many pestilent desires: with a Syrens swectnes,
drawing the mind to the Serpents tayle of sinfull fancy. And
