
1570] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Foxe] 105
Leicester, Lord Cobham, Syr Roger Acton Knight, Iohn Beuer¬
ley preacher, Iohn Hus, Hierome of Prage Scholemaster, with
a number of faithfull Bohemians and Thaborites not to be told
with whom I might also adioyne Laurentius Valla, and
Ioannes Picus the learned Earle of Mirandula. But what do
I stand upon recitall of names, which almost are infinite.
. . . . . . . . . . .
[Vol. i,
For so much as mention is here made of these superstitious
p. 341]
sects of Fryers, and such other beggerly religions, it shall not
seme much impartinent, being moued by the occasion hereof
... to annexe... a certayne other auncient treatise com¬
piled by Geoffray Chawcer by the way of a Dialogue or ques¬
tions moued in the person of a certaine uplandish and simple
ploughman of the Countrey, which treatise for the same, y e
autor intituled Jack vp land...
¶ A treatise of Geoffrey Chawcer intituled
Iacke vplande
[Here follows a reprint of Jack Upland. See above, p. 83.]
. . . . . . . . . . .
[Vol. ii,
p. 965]
Moreouer to these two [Linacre & Pace], I thought it not
Geffray
Chaucer.
out of season, to couple also some mention of Geffray
Iohn
Chaucer, and Iohn Gower: Whiche although beyng much
Gower.
discrepant from these in course of yeares, yet it may seme not
vnworthy to bee matched with these forenamed persons in com¬
mendation of their studie and learnyng...
... Likewise, as touching the tyme of Chaucer, by hys
owne workes in the end of his first booke of Troylus and
Creseide it is manifest, that he and Gower were both of one
Chaucer
& Gower
tyme, althoughe it seemeth that Gower was a great deale his
com-
auncient : both notably learned, as the barbarous rudenes of
mended
for their
that tyme did geue, both great frends together, and both in
studious
exercise.
like kind of studie together occupied, so endeuoryng them¬
selues, and employing their tyme, that they excelling many
other in study and exercise of good letters did passe forth their
Iyues here right worshipfully & godly to the worthye fame
and commendation of their name. Chaucers woorkes bee all
printed in one volume, and therfore knowen to all men.
This I meruell, to see the idle life of y e priestes and clergye
men of that tyme, seyng these lay persons shewed themselues
in these kynde of liberall studies so industrious & fruitfully
occupied: but muche more I meruell to consider this, how
