
114  Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1577-
1577. Dee, John, Dr. Transcript by Dr. John Dee of Thomas Norton's
Ordinall of Alchemy. Ashmole MS. 57 [no pagination].
Authors recited in this booke
. . . . .
Bacon
Boetius
Chauser
Chanon of Lichfelde
. . . .
[See 1477, Norton, above, p. 57.]
1577. Harvey, Gabriel. Letter Book. A suttle and trechrous aduantage
(poetically imagined) taken at unawares by the 3 fatall sisters to
beriue M. Gascoigne of his life.... fol. 35, p. 57. (Letter Book of
Gabriel Harvey, A.D. 1573-1580, ed. from MS. Sloane 93, by E. J.
L. Scott, Camden soc., 1884. See also for dates, Preface, pp. viii,
XV, xvi.)
[Harvey imagines Gascoigne in Purgatory.]
This pleasure reape: and shake thou hands
With auncient cuntrymen of thine:
Acquayntaunce take of Chaucer first
And then with Gower and Lydgate dine.
1577. Holinshed, Raphael. The Laste volume of the Chronides of
England, Scotlande, and Irelande,... Faithfully gathered and
compiled by Raphaell Holinched. At London, Imprinted for John
Harrison, p. 1163. (Holinshed’s Chronicles.. in six volumes,
London, 1808, vol. iii, pp. 58, 59.)
But nowe to rehearse what writers of oure English nation
liued in the days of this Kyng, [Henry the Fourth]. that
renowmed Poete Geffreye Chaucer is worthily named as
principall, a man so exquisitely learned in all sciences, that hys
matche was not lightly founde anye where in those dayes, and
for reducing our Englishe tong to perfect conformitie, hee
hath excelled therein all other. He departed this life about
the yeare of our Lord 1402, as Bale gathereth, but by other it
appeareth, that he deceased the fiue and twentith of October
in the yeare 1400, and lyeth buried at Westminster, in the
South parte of the great Church there, as by a monumente
erected by Nicholas Brigham it doth appeare: John Gower...
studyed not only the common lawes of this Realme, but also
other kindes of literature, and grew to greate knowledge in the
same,... applying his endeuor with Chaucer, to garnish the
Englishe tong, in bringing it from a rude unperfectnesse, unto
a moro apt elegancie: for whereas before those dayes, the
