
1536] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Heywood] 81
But one thynge ye women all I warant you
[16 lines, to]. . . . .
Now shall ye se
[sign. A iij] Lo here the popes bull.
[The Pardoner in The Foure Ps (printed c. 1545, written c. 1580), also resembles
Chaucer‘s Pardoner in tone and attitude; and there is undoubted reminiscence of
Chaucer's Parlement of Foules in the description of the eagle in the ballad written by
Heywood to celebrate the marriage of Queen Mary with Philip of Spain in 1554. The
ballad is reprinted in Harleian Miscellany, ed. Park, 1818, vol. x, pp. 255-6.]
1535. Layton, Richard. Letter to Thomas Cromwell. (Record Office,
see Calendar of State Papers, ed. J. Gairdner, vol. ix, no. 42. This
extract is given in Henry VIII and the English Monasteries, by
F. A. Gasquet, revised edn. 1899, p. 144.)
[Layton writes from Bath abbey] Ye shall herewith receive
a book of Our Lady’s miracles well able to match the Canter¬
bury Tales. Such a book of dreams as ye neuer saw, which I
found in the library.
1535. Roper, Margaret, or More, Sir Thomas. Letter to Lady Alington.
The workes of Sir Thomas More, 1557, p. 1441, col. 2, F. (The
Mirrour of vertue.... or the Life of Sir Thomas More . . by
William Roper, ed. I. Gollancz, the King’s classics, 1903, p. 143;
for MSS. and edns. see ibid., pp. ix-xii.)
In good fayth father quoÞ I, I can no ferther goe, but am
(as I trowe Cresede saith in Chaucer) comen to Dulcarnon
euen at my wittes ende.
[William Roper prefaces this letter by the following note, on p. 117:—"When
Mistress Roper had received this Letter [from Lady Alington], she, at her next
repair to her Father in the Tower, showed him this Letter. And vhat communication
vas thereupon between her Father and her, ye shall perceive by an Answer here
following (as written to the Lady Alington). But whether this answer were written
by Sir Thomas More in his Daughter Roper's name, or by herself, it is not certainly
known."]
1586. Unknown. A Remedy for Sedition, wherein are conteyned
many thynges concernyng the true ond loyall obeysance, that com¬
mens owe unto their prince and soueraygne lorde the kynge.
sign. B i.
Geffrey Chauser sayeth also somewhat in theyr prayse,
beare it well away, and lawde theyme as ye fynde cause,
O eterne people vniuste and vntrewe,
Ay vndiscrete and chaungynge as a fane,
Delytynge euer in rumours that be newe;
CHAUCER CRITICISM.
