
126  Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1585
amended. His mestre Heroicall of Troilus and Cresseid is very
graue and stately, keeping the staffe of seuen, and the verse of
ten, his other verses of the Canterbury tales be but riding
ryme, neuerthelesse very well becomming the matter of that
pleasaunt pilgrimage in which euery mans part is played with
much decency. . . . . . . . .
[p. 62] But our auncient rymers, as Chaucer, Lydgate, and others,
vsed these Cesures either very seldome, or not at all, or
else very licentiously, and many times made their mestres
(they called them riding ryme) of such vnshapely wordes as
would allow no conuenient Cesure, and therefore did let their
rymes runne out at length, and neuer stayd till they came to
the end. . . . . . . . . .
[p. 120] Our maker therfore at these dayes shall not follow
Piers plowman, nor Gouer, nor Lydgate, nor yet Chaucer, for
their language is now out of vse with vs.
[These are the three longest references to Chaucer, the other allusions are generally
to his verse; or quotations. Puttenham mentions Troilus and Criseyde four times,
the C. Tales three times, and the Rom. of the Rose and Clerkes Tale once cach. One
of the allusions to Chaucer's Cresseida' however (Arber's reprint, p. 221), and the
quotation which follows, really refers to Henryson's Complaint of Cresseid, 1475, and
the quotation is from the opening lines of that poem.]
[c. 1585.] Lambarde, William. Dictionarium Angliæ Topographicum
de Historicum: An Alphabetical Description of the Chief Places
in England and Wales.... now first published from a Manuscript
under the Author’s own Hand. London, MDCCXXX, pp. 390-1.
1402,
In the South Part of this Churche [Westminster Abbey]
Eulogium,
Bale Cent. Iyeth Geffrey Chaucer, whose Tombe was re-edified in my
Memorie by Mr Brigham, and of whome Leland sometyme
made this Epitaphe
Prœdicat algerum merita florentia Dantem
. . . . . . . .
Cui veneres debet patria lingua suas
[See below, App. A, c. 1545, Leland.]
... And lastly, not farre from Chaucer Iyeth Robert Halle,
slayne by the Lord Latymer, as he kneled at Masse, upon a
Strife growen betwene theim in Fraunce, for the takinge of
a Prisonner: Thus muche of the Buryed.
[This work was probably written in 1585, as in that year, Lambarde wrote to
Camden saying that he must give up his own work in favour of Camden's; see Cam¬
deni et illustrium virorum epistolae, scriptore Thoma Smitho, 1691, pp.28-30. See
also below, p. 191, 1615, V[allans] W., The Honourable Prentise.]
