
156 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1598
1598. Barnfleld, Richard. Poems: In diuers humors. London. Printed
by G. S. for Iohn Iaggard, and are to be solde at his shoppe neere
Temple-barre, at the Signe of the Hand and starre, 1598, sign. E 2.
Sonnet ii, Against the Dispraysers of Poetrie. (Illustrations of
Old English Literature, 1866, ed. J. P. Collier, vol. i, pp. 43-4.
Also Complete poems of Richard Barnfield, ed. A. B. Grosart, Roxb.
club, 1876, p. 189; English Scholar's library, No. 14, ed. E. Arber,
p. 119.)
Chaucer is dead; and Gower Iyes in grave!
The Earle of Surrey, long agoe is gone!
Sir Philip Sidneis soule, the Heauens haue!
George Gascoigne him beforne was tomb'd in stone!
Yet, tho' their Bodies lye full low in ground,
(As every thing must dye, that earst was borne)
Their liuing fame no Fortune can confound;
Nor euer shall their labours be forlorne.
And you, that discommend sweet Poetrie
(So that the Subject of the same be good.)
Here may you see your fond simplicitie!
Sith Kings have fauord it, of royall Blood.
The King of Scots (now liuing), is a Poet;
As his Lepanto and his Furies shoe it!
[These poems are the last of four pamphlets in verse bound and issued together in
1598; the title of the first being Tle Encomion ef Lady Pecunia. This reference is
not in the edn. of 1605.]
1598. Chapman, George. To the vnderstander, an address prefixed to
Achilles Shield, translated as the other seuen Bookes of Homer out
of his eighteenth booke of Iliades by George Chapman Gent, sign.
B. 2. (Elizabethan critical essays, ed. G. Gregory Smith, 1904,
vol. ii, p. 305.)
All tongues haue inricht themselues from their originall...
with good neighbourly borrowing... & why may not ours.
Chaucer (by whom we will needes authorise our true eng¬
lish), had more newe wordes for his time then any man needes
to deuise now.
1598. Dallington, Sir Robert, A Method for Trauell, Shewed by taking
the View of France, As it stoode in the yeare of our Lord 1598.
London, printed by Thomas Creede [1606?] sign. V 4. (The only
modern edn. is a French translation, “View of Fraunce,” traduit
par E. Emérique, 1892, pp. 188-9.)
And as wee may say of our English, that it very much
Lu Regius differeth from that of Chaucers time: so with Lu
[Louis le
Roy]
Regius of the French tongue, that within these fiftie
yeeres, it is almost growen a new language, and which still
