
136 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1592
[sign. K1] Chaucere authoritie I am certaine, shalbe alleadgd against
mee for a many of these balductums [i. e. against coining new
and Latinised words]. Had Chaucer liu’d to this age I am
verily perswaded hee wou’d haue discarded the tone halfe of
the harsher sort of them.
They were the Oouse, which ouerflowing barbarisme, with¬
drawne to her Scottish Northren chanell, had left behind her.
Art, like yong grasse in the spring of Chaucers florishing, was
glad to peepe vp through any slime of corruption, to be behold¬
ing to she car'd not whome for apparaile, trauailing in those
colde countries.
1592. Nashe, Thomas. Pierce-Penilesse, his supplication to the Diuell,
sign. D 3 b. (Works of Thomas Nashe, ed. R. B. McKerrow, 1904-5,
vol. i, pp. 193, 194.)
The fruits   To them that demaund what fruites the Poets of
of Poetry
our time bring forth, or wherein they are able to
proue themselues necessary to the state. Thus I answere.
First and for most, they haue cleansed our language from
barbarisme and made the vulgar sort here in London.... to
aspire to a richer puritie of speach.... What age will not
praise immortal Sir Philip Sidney.... together with Sir
english   Nicholas Bacon.... and merry sir Thomas Moore,
worke
for the chiefe pillers of our english speeche? Not so
much but Chaucers host Baly in Southworke, and his wife of
Bath he keeps such a stirre with, in his Canterbury tales, shalbe
talkt of whilst the Bath is vsde, or there be euer a badhouse
in Southwork.
1592. Stowe, John. The Annales of England... from the first in¬
habitation untill this present yeere 1592, pp. 431, 517-8. [This is
the same book as the Chronicles of England, 1580, only revised and
enlarged, see above, p. 119, note under 1580, Stowe.]
Chaucer   About the same time the Eale [sic] of Salisbury,
and other
sent into   and sir Richard Anglisison a Poyton, the Byshoppe
France
of Saint Dauids, the Byshoppe of Hereford, Geffrey
Chaucer, (the famous Poet of England) and other, were sent
into Fraunce to treat a peace, or at the least a truce for two
yeere or more, but they coulde not obtayne any longer truce,
then for one moneth, which they utterly refused. Whereupon
they stayed in Fraunce about these things....
[For this journey of Chaucer's, see above, 1377, p. 5; 1410, p. 20. For the text of
the 2nd reference, pp 517-18, see below, p. 164, under 1600, The Annales of England,
pp. 527-8, where the reference is practically the same.]
