
98 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1563-
[sign, S i]
those two vorthie wittes, will moch mislike this my writyng.
Si]
But such men be euen like followers of Chaucer and Petrarke
as one here in England did folow Syr Tho. More: who, being
most vnlike vnto him, in wit and learning, neuertheles in
wearing his gowne awrye vpon the one shoulder, as Syr Tho.
More was wont to doe, would needes be counted like vnto hym.
. . . . . . . . . . .
[sign.
And you, that.... neuer went farder than the schole of
S i b]
Petrarke and Ariostus abroad, or els of Chaucer at home....
1568. Neville, Alexander. A dedicatory poem in Eglogs, Epytaphes,
and Sonettes, newly written by Barnabe Googe, 1563, 15 Marche.
¶ Imprynted at London, by Thomas Colwell, for Raffe Newbery.
Three copies only known, Huth & Britwell libraries and Capel
collection Trin. Coll. Camb. (English Reprints, ed. E. Arber, 1871,
p. 23).
Alexander Neuyll.
. . . . . . .
Go forward styll to aduaunce thy fame
Life's Race halfe ryghtly ron
Farre easyer tis for to obtain
the Type of true Renowne.
Like Labours haue been recompenst
with an immortall Crowne.
By this doth famous Chaucer lyue,
by this a thousande moore
Of later yeares. By this alone
The old renowmed Stoore
of Auncient Poets lyue....
1564. Bullein, William. A Dialogue bothe pleasaunte and pietifull,
wherein is a goodly regimente against the feuer Pestilence...
Newly corrected by William Bullein the autour thereof.—Imprinted
at London by Ihon Kingston, Marcii MDL xiiii. [Unique copy
of 1st edn. 1564, in Britwell library. In 1573 edn., earliest in
B. M., the reference is on pp. 19-20.] (Ed. M. W. Bullen and
A. H. Bullen, E. E. T. soc., extra series lii, 1888, pp. 16-17.)
Wittie Chaucer satte in a chaire of gold couered with
Roses, writing Prose and Risme, accompanied with the Spirites
of many Kynges, Knightes and faire Ladies, whom hee
pleasauntly besprinkeled with the sweete water of the welle
consecrated unto the Muses ecleped Aganippe; and as the
heauenly spirite commended his deare Brigham for the worthy
entombing of his bones, worthy of memorie, in the long slepyng
chamber of most famous kinges, Euen so in tragedie he bewailed
