
160 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1599-
the raigne of Henry the sixt : Increased by William Thinne
Esquire, in the raigne of Henry the eight : Corrected and twice
increased through mine oune painefull labours, in the raigne of
Queene Elizabeth, to wit in the yeare 1561, and again beautified
with noates, by me collected out of diuers Recordes and Monu¬
mentes, which I deliuered to my louing friende Thomas Speight,
and he hauing drawne the same into a good forme and methode,
as also explained the old and obscure wordes, etc., hath
published them in Anno 1597.
[The poem here called Chance of dice, a MS. of which is in the Bodleian (MS.
Fairfax 16), is anonymous, it is certainly not by Chaucer. See above, c. 1440, p. 44.]
[1598-1600.] Harvey, Gabriel. MS. notes in his copy of Speght’s
Chaucer. See below, App. A [1598-1600].
1599. Daniel, Sam[uel]. Musophilus: Containing a generall defence of
learning. Separate title-page and pagination, but part of the
Poeticall Essayes of Sam. Danyel. Newly corrected and augmented
.... 1599, sign. B 3. (Daniel’s Complete Works, ed. A. B.
Grosart, 1885-96, vol. i, p. 230.)
But yet in all this interchange of all,
Virtue we see, with her faire grace, stands fast;
For what hy races hath there come to fall,
With low disgrace, quite vanished and past,
Since Chaucer liu’d who yet liues and yet shall,
Though (which I grieue to say) but in his last.
Yet what a time hath he wrested from time,
And won vpon the mighty waste of daies,
Vnto th' immortall honor of our clime,
That by his meanes came first adorn'd with Baies,
Vnto the sacred Relicks of whose rime
We yet are bound in zeale to offer praise?
And could our liues begotten in this age
Obtaine but such a blessed hand of yeeres,
And scape the fury of that threatning rage,
Which in confused clowdes gastly appeares.
Who would not straine his trauailes to ingage,
When such true glory should succeed his cares?
But whereas he came planted in the spring,
And had the Sun, before him, of respect;
We set in th' autumne, in the withering,
And sullen season of a cold defect.
. . . . . . . .
[Musophilus was probably also issued separately in 1599, before being bound up
vith Poeticall Essayes; this was a common practice of Daniel’s.
