
1555] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Stevins] 93
sion, to knowe with what degree of the sodiacke any planet
ascendeth on the horizonte whether his latitude be north or
sowth; as the meanynge of the same conclusion was most
hardest by reason of the imparfitenes therof so in practise I
fownde him most false, as he shall fynde that Iyst to take the
Iyke paines. Notwithstandinge this haue I doone, not chal¬
lenginge for my selffe, but renuncynge and leauinge to worthie
Chaucer his due praise for this worke, which if it had come
parfite vnto oure handes (no dowbte) woolde haue merited
wonderfull praise. As for me if I haue done any thinge therin
it shall suffice if the louers of wittie Chawcer do accepte my
good will and entente.
Vale.
. . . . . . . . . . .
[fol. 90 b] [Upon the first degree of Aries] Albeit y t in Chaucers
tyme upon the .12. day of March the sonne entred into the
bedde of Aries: yet in oure tyme y u shalt finde that the sonne
entreth therin the .10. day of the same moneth.
. . . . . . . . . . .
[fol. 66] Thus endethe the conclusions of the astrolabye composed by
Geoffrey Chawcer.
1555. Braham, Robert. The pistle to the reader, [prefixed to] The
Auncient historie and onely trewe and syncere Cronicle of warres
betwixte the Grecians and the Troyans... translated in to
englyshe verse by John Lydgate, sign. *B i and *B i b. (Prefaces,
dedications... from early English books, by W. C. Hazlitt, 1874,
pp. 18, 19.)
.... And so by these degrees, hath bene at the laste by
y e díligence of John Lydgate a moncke of Burye, brought into
our englyshe tonge: and dygested as maye appere, in verse
whoes trauayle as well in other his doynges as in this hathe
wythout doubte so muche preuayled in this our vulgare lan¬
guage, that hauynge his prayse dewe to his deseruynges, may
worthyly be numbred amongst those that haue chefelye deserued
of our tunge. As the verye perfect disciple and imitator of
the great Chaucer, y e onelye glorye and beauty of the same.
Neuertheles, Iyke wyse as it hapned y e same Chaucer to lease
y e prayse of that tyme wherin he wrote beyng then when in
dede al good letters were almost aslepe, so farre was the grose¬
nesse and barbarousnesse of that age from the vnderstandinge
of so deuyne a wryter. That if it had not bene in this our
time, wherin all kindes of learnyng (thancked be god) haue as
much floryshed as euer they did by anye former dayes within
