
1532] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 77
[Envoy addressing the assemble of foules]
And where thou become so ordre thy language
That in excuse thy prynter loke thou haue
Whiche hathe the kepte from ruynous domage
In snoweswyte paper, thy mater for to saue
With thylke same langage that Chaucer to the gaue
In termes olde, of sentence clered newe
Than methe muche sweter, who can his mynde auewe.
[The first four verses each terminate with a reference to the 'parlament of foules' ;
the verse quoted here is the second. There are three verses in the envoy. The refer¬
ences are taken from Dibdin's Ames.]
1580. Lindsay, Sir David. The complaynte and testament of a Popiniay
Which lyeth sore wounded and maye not dye. [col.] Imprynted at
London in Fletestrete.. by John Byddell 1538. Incipit Prologus,
sign. a i b. [Title of later (Scotch) edns., The testament and com¬
playnt of our souerane lordis Papyngo, Kyng James the Fyft, etc.]
(Poetical works, ed. D. Laing, 1879, vol. i, pp. 61-2; cf. App.,
vol. iii, pp. 259-60. Also Works, part ii, the Monarche and other
Poems, ed. J. Small, E. E. T. soc. 1866, 2nd edn. 1883, p. 223.)
Of poetis now in tyll oure vulgar toung,
For why the bell of retorik is roung
By Chaucer, Goweir, and Lidgate laureate
Who dare presume these poetis till impoung
Whose swete sentence through Albion bene soung.
[Note there is a great difference in the spelling of the earlier and later edns., the
first being English, the later ones Scotch.]
1531-2. Gaunte, William. Will, with bequest of Canterbury Tales,
see below, App. A, 1531-2.
1532. Berthelet, Thomas. To the Reder. Jo. Gower de confessione
Amantis. Imprinted at London in Fletestrete by Thomas Berthe¬
lette, sign. aa iij b, aa iiij.
And this... I maye be bolde to saye, that if we shulde
neuer haue sene his [Gower's] counnynge warkes, the whiche
... wytnesse, what a clerke he was, the wordes of the mooste
famous and excellente Geffraye Chauser, that he wrote in the
end of his moste speciall warke, that is intitled Troylus and
Creseyde, do sufficiently testifye the same, where he sayth:
O morall Gower [etc. Tr. and Cr., Bk. v, ll. 1856-9.]
¶ The whiche noble warke, and many other of the sayde
Chausers, that neuer were before imprinted, and those that
very fewe men knewe, and fewer hadde them, be nowe of late
put forthe together in a fayre volume. [i. e. Thynne’s edn. See
next entry.] By the whiche wordes of Chauser, we may also
