
1585] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 127
[c. 1585.] Harvey, Gabriel. MS. notes in Gabriel Harvey's hand¬
writing, prefixed to his copy of The Surueye of the World, by
Dionise Alexandrine; englished by T. Twine, 1572. (Gabriel
Harvey’s Marginalia, ed. G. C. Moore Smith, Stratford-upon-Avon,
1913, pp. 159-161, 162.)
[These MS. notes deal with astronomy in connexion with Poets, notably Chaucer,
Lydgate and Spenser, but they refer also to foreign writers, and contemporary
Englishmen. They aro pref̂xed to a collection of small Books of Travel bound
together, one of them [The Trauailer, by Ierome Turler] presented by Spenser to
Gabriel Harvey, 1578, most of them having Harvey's name on the title pages. These
books are in the possession of Prof. I. Gollancz.]
Notable Astronomical descriptions in Chawcer, and Lidgate;
fine artists in manie kinds, and much better learned than owre
moderne poets.
Chawcers conclusions of the Astrolabie, still excellent and
vnempeachable: especially for the Horizon of Oxford. A
worthie man, that initiated his little sonne Lewis with such
cunning and subtill conclusions: as sensibly and plainly
expressed as he cowld deuise. ... In the Squiers tale. In the
tale of the Nonnes preist. In the beginning of the seconde
booke of Troilus.
The Description of the Spring, in the beginning of the
prologues of Chawcers Canterburie tales.
In the beginning of the Complaint of the Black Knight. In
the beginning of the flo[wre] and the leafe.
In the beginning of Lidgats Storie of Thebes. In the
romant of the Rose: 122.6. In the beginning of the testament
of Creseide, a winterlie springe.
. . . . . . . . . . .
The description of Winter, in the Frankleins tale. In the
beginning of the flowre of Courtesie: made bie Lidgate.
In the beginning of the assemblie of Ladies. In a ballad 343.
The description of the hower of the day: in the Man of
Lawes prologue. In the tale of the Nonnes preist. In the
parsons prologue.
Notable descriptions, and not anie so artificial in Latin, or
Greek.
Eccè etiam personarum rerumque Iconismi.
The artificial description of a cunning man, or Magician,
or Astrologer, in the Franklins tale.
Two cristall stones artificially sett in the botom of the fresh
well : in the romant of the Rose, 123. The Natiuitie of
Hypermestre: in her Legend.
Fowre presents of miraculous vertu: An horse, & a sword;
a glasse & a ring : in the Squiers tale.
