
1586] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 129
Ille enim extra omnem ingenij aleam positus, & Poetastras
nostros longo pòst se interuallo relinquens.
–jam monte potitus
Ridet anhelantem dura ad fastigia turbam.
[For reference in later edn. see below, pp. 162-3, 1600.]
1586. Ferne, Sir John. The Blazon of Gentrie, etc., p. 202.
The bearer heereof [= Arms of Pressignie), ne none of
his name be English: but bycause it is a french coate I will
give it you in french blazonne: .... But if you would
blaze in french of Stratford at Bow, say, that Pressignie
beareth barrewaies sixe peces, per pale counterchanged in
chief. . . . .
[Allusion to Prologue C. Tales, ll. 124-5?]
1586. Webbe, William. A Discourse of English Poetrie, [only two
copies known, of which one is among the Malone books in the
Bodl, libraryl, sign. C ii b, C iii, D iii, E iiii. (English Reprints, ed.
E. Arber, 1871, pp. 31-2, 41, 52; Elizabethan Critical Essays, ed.
G. Gregory Smith, 1904, vol. i, pp. 241, 251, 263.)
[sign. C ii b,   The first of our English Poets that I haue heard of was Iohn
Ciii]
Gower... his freend Chawcer.. speaketh of him often¬
times in diuers places of hys workes. Chawcer, who for that
excellent fame which hee obtayned in his Poetry, was alwayes
accounted the God of English Poets (such a tytle for honours
sake hath beene giuen him),. . . hath left many workes, both
for delight and profitable knowledge, farre exceeding any other
that as yet euer since hys time directed theyr studies that way.
Though the manner of hys stile may seeme blunte and course
to many fine English eares at these dayes, yet in trueth, if it
be equally pondered, and with good judgment aduised, and
confirmed with the time wherein he wrote, a man shall per¬
ceiue thereby euen a true picture or perfect shape of a right
Poet. He by his delightsome vayne, so gulled the eares of
men with his deuises, that, although corruption bare such
sway in most matters, that learning and truth might skant bee
admitted to shewe it selfe, yet without controllment, myght
hee gyrde at the vices and abuses of all states, and gawle with
very sharpe and eger inuentions, which he did so learnedly
and pleasantly, that none therefore would call him into
question. For such was his bolde spyrit, that what enormities
he saw in any, he would not spare to pay them home, eyther
in playne words, or els in some prety and pleasant couert,
that the simplest might espy him.
. . . . . . . . . . .
CHAUCER CRITICISM.
