
1598] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [F. Thynne] 151
hereafter) was the perfectest: ys the ernest desire and loue
my father hadde to haue Chaucers Woorkes rightlye to
be published. for the performance wherof, my father not onlye
vsed the helpe of that lerned and eloquent kn[i]ghte and anti¬
quarye Sir Briane Tuke, but had also made greate serche for
copies to perfecte his woorkes, as apperethe in the ende of the
squiers tale, in his editione printed in the yere 1542; but
further had comissione to serche all the liberaries of Englande
for Chaucers Workes, so that oute of all the Abbies of this
Realme (whiche reserved anye monumentes thereof) he was
fully furnished with multitude of Bookes. emongest whiche,
one coppye of some part of his woorkes came to his handes
subscribed in diuers places withe “examinatur Chaucer." By
this Booke, and conferringe manye of the other written copies
to-gether, he deliuered his editione, fullye corrected, as the
amendementes vnder his hande, in the fyrst printed booke that
euer was of his woorkes (beinge stamped by the fyrste impres¬
[p. 7] sione that was in England) will well declare, at what tyme he
added manye things whiche were not before printed, as yoᵘ
nowe haue donne soome, of whiche I am perswaded (and that
not withoute reasone) the originall came from mee. In whiche
his editione, beinge printed but with one coolume in a syde,
there was the pilgrymes tale, a thinge moore odious to the
[p. 8] Clergye, then the speche of the plowmanne; that pilgrimes
tale begynnynge in this sorte:
In Lincolneshyre fast by a fenne,
Standes a relligious howse who dothe
yt kenne, &c.1
[p.9] In this tale did Chaucer [that is, the unknown author] most
bitterlye enueye against the pride, state, couetousnes, and
extorcione of the Bysshoppes, their officialls, Archdeacons,
vicars generalls, comissaryes, and other officers of the spirituall
courte. The Inuentione and order whereof (as I haue herde yt
related by some, nowe of good worshippe bothe in courte and
countrye, but then my fathers clerkes,) was, that one comynge
into this relligious howse, walked vpp and doune the churche,
beholdinge goodlye pictures of Bishoppes in the windowes, at
lengthe the manne contynuynge in that contemplatione, not
knowinge what Bishoppes they were, a graue olde manne withe
[1 This appears in The Newe Courte of Venus, see above, p. 82 [1536-40?],
The Pilgrim's Tale.
