
78 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1532
vnderstonde, that he and Gower were bothe of one selfe tyme,
both excellently lerned, both great frendes to gether, and bothe
a Iyke endeuoured them selfe and imployed theyr tyme so wel
and so vertuously, that they dyd not onely passe forth their
Iyfes here ryght honourably; but also for their so doyng, so
longe (of Iykelyhode) as letters shal endure and continue, this
noble royalme shall be the better, ouer and besyde theyr
honest fame and renowme.  . . . . . .
: . . . . . . . . . .
[sign. aa fiij] The other [Chaucer] Iyeth buryed in the monasterye of
Seynt Peters at westmyster in an ile on the south syde of the
Churche.
[In the 2nd edn. of 1554 this address is practically unaltered.]
1532. The workes of Geffray Chaucer newly printed, with dyuers
workes whiche were neuer in print before. [Blackletter. ed.
by William Thynne. col.] Thus endeth the workes of Geffray
Chaucer. Printed at London.. T. Godfray... 1532.
[The Dedication to Henry VIII, sign. A ij-A iij is by Sir Brian Tuke (q. v. pp. 79-80).
On the last page, fol ccclxxxiii, is Surigo's epitaph on Chaucer. Skeat has pointed
out (Chaucerian and other Pieces, Oxford, 1897, p. ix), that if the title of Thynne's
book is properly read, it will be seen that he did not intend to include as Chaucer's
all the works printed in it. He suggests that the title should read 'The workes of
.. Chaucer.. with dyuers workes [of various authors] whiche were neuer in print
before.' So that it was Thynne’s intention to print a collection of the works of Chaucer
and other writers; and it was Stowe, who, in his edn. of 1561, so altered the title as to
claim for Chaucer for the first time the authorship of the whole of Thynne's volume.
Besides these works by other writers (see list in note below), Thynne printed for
the first time six of Chaucer's genuine works, viz. : Rom. of the Rose, ll. 1-1705;
Legend of Good Women; Book of the Duchess; Complaint to Pity; Lack of Stead¬
fastness and Astrolabe. For an account of this edn., and the poems contained in
it, as well as for later editions, see Chaucer's works, ed. W. W. Skeat, 1894, vol. i,
pp. 28 et seq.; also Skeat's introduction to a facsimile reprint of the above, published
by A. Moring and H. Frowde, 1905. For a clear account of all editions of Chaucer's
'Works,' from Pynson 1526 up to 1906, see Chaucer, a bibliographical manual, by
E. P. Hammond, N. York, 1908, pp. 114-149.
For purposes of reference, we append here a list of the varlous poems which have
by his editors been wrongly attributed to Chaucer, and printed as his in the old folio
edns., including those 'appended' by Thynne, and which were claimed by later editors.
For further information about these spurious poems, see Skeat’s Chaucer Canon, 1900,
pp. 94-148, also Chaucer, a bibliographical manual, by E. P. Hammond, N. York,
1908, pp. 406-63. Possibly Nos. 21 and 24 have never been actually quoted as
Chaucer's, but Skeat thinks it is difficult to be sure ot this. At any rate, they
occur in 'Chaucer's Works'. This also applies to No. 5. See list of apocryphal
pieces in Skeat’s edn. of Chaucer's Works, vol. vii, 1897. For an admirable summary
of the present position as regards the Chaucer Canon, see Chaucer, by E. P. Hammond,
pp. 51-69.]
Spurious poems printed by Pynson 1526.
1. La Belle Dame sans Mercy [by
ship see Skeat's Introduction to the
Richard Ros; repr. by Thynne].
Works of Chaucer and others, p. xl-
2. Morall prouerbs [by Richard Ros].
xli].
3. The complaint of Mary Magdaleyn  4. The letter of Dydo to Eneas.
[Reprinted by Thynne. For author-  5. Proverbes of Lydgate.
