
120 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1581
1581. Howell, Thomas. H. His Deuises, for his owne exercise and his
Friends pleasure, sign. B iij b. [Unique copy in the Bodl. library,
Malone, 342.] (Occasional issues of unique or very rare books, ed.
A. B. Grosart, 1879, vol. viii, p. 178.)
¶ Ruine the rewarde of Vice.
. . . . . . . .
Is not the pride of Helene prayse bereft?
And Cresside staynde, that Troian knight imbrased:
Whose bewties bright but darke defame hath left,
Unto them both through wanton deedes preferred.
As they by dynte of Death their dayes haue ended,
So shall your youth, your pompe, and bewties grace
When nothing else but vertue may take place.
[Howell borrows many phrases from Chaucer in the ‘Devises‘; see Walter Raleigh's
introduction to Howell’s Devises, Clarendon Press, 1906, pp. xi-xiv, and see above
p. 100.]
1581. Lawson, John. Lawsons Orchet, wharin thou shall fynde most
pleasaunt fructe of all mannor of sortes. That is to sai, the true
acte, fact, or deade, of euery Prince reininge in this lande sens yt
was first inhabett, with the yeares of thaire contynuaunce: and the
varieite of the opinyons of the Historiographers, newcly gathyred,
and augmented, contynuinge vnto the Conquest.—1581.— [Then
follows a note at the foot of the page] A°. Dm. 1581, et Regin.
Elizab. 23. Jho. lawson feodary in y e County of Northub: sent
me this booke. [And below it in a modern hand] This is Lord
Burghleigh's Handwriting. Lansdowne MSS. 208, ff. 411-411 b.
(This extract is printed by S. E. Brydges in Restituta, vol. iv,
1814, p. 29.)
[A personal Address from the Author] To the Reader [at
the end of the Chronicle is followed by a kind of Dedicatory
and explanatory address.]
[fol. 411] To the right honorable lorde Burghley &c. sir William
Damsell Knight, and to all his other good maisters off the
courte of wairdes and liuereis theire humble seruaunte John
lawson, wisheethe healthe, &c.
. . . . . . . . . .
Yet not so contented for more ease to have vnderstande
Thaire travell all, whiche shynde as pearles in dede,
I tooke maister John Iydgaite strighte then in my hande,
With whome the reste of my tyme I thought to leede:
Whose wordye praise and everlastynge meade,
[fol. 411 b] Thoo he was a monnke at that Abbay late Bury,
Myghte be in equale prase with maister Chawcer truly.
