
158 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1598
Christian faith against Infidels and miscreants, and to seeke
honoure by feats of armes.
A Knight there was, and that a worthie man, [Hakluyt quotes (in
The English Knights Prologue.
The time
black letter) to ‘ayenst another Heathen in Turkie’]
when Chaucer
wrote, is thus
Written in the lustie moneth of May
mentioned in
the end of
in our Palace, where many a million
his letter of
of louers true have habitation,
Cupide.
The yeere of grace ioyfull and iocond,
a thousand, foure hundred and second.
[None ot these references are in the first edition ot 1589.]
1598. [Hall, Joseph (Bishop of Norwich).] Virgidemiarum The Three
last Bookes. Of byting Satyres. Imprinted at London by Richard
Bradocke for Robert Dexter, 1598. Lib. 4, Satyre 4, sign. D 1 b;
Lib. 5, Satyre 2, sign. E 7. [Copy in B. M. is bound with] Virgi¬
demiarum sixe Bookes. First three Bookes of Toothless Satyrs.—
London. Printed by Thomas Creede for Robert Dexter, 1597.
[The title-page of the 1598 edn. faces sign. F 3 b.] (Satires by
Joseph Hall with the Illustrations of the late Thomas Warton and
Additional Notes by Samuel Weller Singer, 1824, pp. 101, 132.
[sign. D 1]
Till now he waxt a toothlesse Bacheler
He thaw's like Chaucers frosty Ianiuere;
And sets a Months minde vpon smyling May
[sign. E 7]
. . . . . . . .
Certes, if Pity died at Chaucers date,
[A reference to the sepulchre of Pity in the Court of Love (not by Chaucer), l. 701.]
He liu'd a widdower long behind his mate.
1598. Marston, John, [pseud. W. Kinsayder). The Scourge of Villanie,
Three Bookes of Satyres. At London Printed by I. R. and are to be
sold by John Buzbie, sign. B 4 and b. (The Works of John
Marston, ed. J. O. Halliwell, 1856, vol. iii, p. 246.)
Know I hate to affect too much obscuritie, & harshnes,
To those that seem iudiciall perusers.
because they profit no sense... Perseus is crabby, because
antient, & his ierkes (being perticulerly giuen to priuate cus¬
tomes of his time) duskie, Juuenal (vpon the like occasion)
seemes to our iudgement, gloomie. Yet both of them goe a
good seemely pace, not stumbling, shuffling. Chaucer is harde
euen to our vnderstandings; who knows not the reason?
Howe much more those old Satyres which expresse themselues
in termes, that breathed not long euen in their daies.
[For further traces of Chaucer influence on Marston, see Chaucer’s Einfluss auf das
englische Drama, by O. Ballman, Anglia, xxv, pp. 77-8.]
