
1598] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [F. Thynne] 155.
Chaucer's proper woorkes were distinguyshed from the adulterat,
and suche as were not his, as the Testamente of Cressyde, The
Letter of Cupide, and the ballade begynnynge 'I haue a
layde, where so she bee' &c., whiche Chaucer never composed,
as may suffycientlye be proued by the thinges them selues.
(3) The thirde matter ys, that in youre epistle dedicatorye
[p. 70] to Sir Roberte Cecille, yoᵘ saye, “This Booke, whene yt was
first published in printe, was dedicate to Kinge Henrye the
eighte". But that is not soo, for the firste dedicatione to that
kinge was by mye father, when diuerse of Chaucers woorkes
[p. 71] had byn thrise printed before; whereof two editions were by
William Caxtone, the fyrste printer of Englande, who first
printed Chaucers tales in one colume in a ragged letter, and
after in one colume in a better order; and the thirde editione
was printed, as farre as I remember, by winkine de word
or Richarde Pynson, the seconde and thirde printers of Eng¬
lande, as I take them. Whiche three edit[i]ons beinge verye
imperfecte and corrupte, occasioned my father (for the love he
oughte to Chawcers lernynge) to seeke the augmente and
correctione of Chawcer's Woorkes, whiche he happely fynyshed;
the same beinge, since that tyme, by often printinge muche
corrupted.  ...
[Francis Thynne makes two mistakes here. (1) Speght was alluding to the
collected edn. of Chaucer's 'Workes' first made by William Thynne, which was the
basis of his own edn. Wm. Thynne's dedication is reprinted in all the old editions,
1542 (1550), 1561, 1598, 1602, 1687 and 1721.
(2) Only one edn. of Chaucer's Works had been published before the date of
Thynne's 1532, and that was Pynson's [see note under 1582, Thynne, p. 78]. But
many soparate works of Chaucer had been published before 1582.]
(4) [Speght, in his catalogue of authors, has omitted many
authors 'vouched by chawcer'.
(5) & (6) Speght misreads 'Haroltes' for 'Harlottes'; and
[p. 74] 'Minoresse' for Moueresse,'  both in the “Romaunt of the Rose’].
Thus hoopinge that yoᵘ will accepte in good and frendlye
[p. 75] parte, these my whatsoeuer conceytes vttered vnto yoᵘ, (to the
ende Chawcer's Woorkes by muche conference and manye
iudgments mighte at leng[t]he obteyne their true perfectione
and glorye, — as I truste they shall yf yt please godde to
lende me tyme and leysure to reprinte, correcte, and comente
the same, after the manner of the Italians, who haue largelye
comented Petrarche;)—I sett ends to these matters: comyt¬
tinge you to god, and me to your Curtesye. Clerkenwell
Greene, the xvi of december, 1599. Your louinge frende,
FRANCIS THYNNE.
