
1597] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 145
Ingen. Sir, the worde as Chaucer useth it hath noe unhonest
meaninge in it, for it signifieth a jeste.
Gull. Tush! Chaucer is a foole, and you are another for
defendinge of him.
Ingen. Then you shall heare Spencers veyne.
A gentle pen rides prickinge on the plaine
. . . . . . . . .
Gull. Stay man! .... Let me heare Mr Shakspear's veyne.
Ingen. [Seven lines in imitation of Shakespeare's ‘Venus
and Adonis.’]
Gull.  .... Ey marry, Sir, these have some life in them!
Let this duncified worlde esteeme of Spencer and Chaucer, I'le
worshipp sweet Mr Shakspeare, and to honoure him will lay
his Venus and Adonis under my pillowe.
[For an account of Chaucer influence on this play, as well as on part II, 1602, see
Chaucer's Einfluss auf das englische Drama, by O. Ballman, Anglia, xxv, pp. 45-8.]
1597. Beaumont, Francis. F. B. to his very louing friend T.S. [Letter
to Thomas Speght in] The Workes of .... Chaucer [ed. T. Speght],
1598, sign. [a iii b-a v].
[sign. a iii b] I am sorrie that neither the worthinesse of Chaucers owne
praise, nor the importunate praiers of diuerse your louing
friends can yet mooue you to put into print those good
obseruations and collections you haue written of him. For as
for the obiections, that in our priuate talke you are wont to
say are commonly alledged against him, as first that many of
his wordes (as it were with ouerlong lying) are growne too
hard and vnpleasant, and next that hee is somewhat too broad
in some of his speeches, and that the worke therefore should
be the lesse gratious : these are no causes, or no sufficient
causes to withhold from Chaucer such desert of glorie, as at
your pleasure you may bestow vpon him. For first to defend
him against the first reproofe. [Beaumont shows that no man
can so write in the shifting language of every day, ] as that all
his wordes may remain currant many yeares. [This even
happens among the Latin writers themselues, when Latin was
a spoken tongue]....
But yet so pure were Chaucers wordes in his owne daies,
as Lidgate that learned man calleth him The Loadstarre of
the English language: and so good they are in our daies, as
Maister Spencer... hath adorned his owne stile with that
beauty and grauitie, which Tully speakes of : [reviving ancient
words] and his much frequenting of Chaucers antient speeches
CHAUCER CRITICISM.
