
152 [F. Thynne] Five Hundred Years of (A.D. 1598
a longe white hedde and berde, in a large blacke garment girded
vnto hym, came forthe and asked hym, what he iudged
of those pictures in the windowes, who sayed he knewe not
what to make of them, but that they looked Iyke vnto our
mitred Bishoppes; to whome the old father replied, “yt
is true, they are Iyke, but not the same, for our byshoppes are
farr degenerate from them,” and withe that, made a large
discourse of the Bishopps and of their courtes.
This tale, when kinge henrye the eighte had redde, he called
my father unto hym, sayinge, “William Thynne! I dobte this
will not be allowed; for I suspecte the Byshoppes will call
[p. 10] the in questione for yt". to whome my father, beinge in great
fauore with his prince, (as manye yet lyuinge canne testyfye,)
sayed, “yf your grace be not offended, I hoope to be protected
by yoᵘ:" wherevppon the kinge bydd hym goo his waye, and
feare not. All whiche not withstandinge, my father was
called in questione by the Byshoppes, and heaued at by
Cardinall Wolseye, his olde enymye, for manye causes, but
mostly for that my father had furthered Skelton to publishe
his ’Collen Cloute’ againste the Cardinall, the moste parte of
whiche Booke was compiled in my fathers howse at Erithe in
Kente. But for all my fathers frendes, the Cardinalls per¬
swadinge auctorytye was so greate withe the kinge, that thoughe
by the kinges fauor my father escaped bodelye daunger, yet
the Cardinall caused the kinge so muche to myslyke of that
tale, that chaucer must be newe printed, and that discourse of
the pilgrymes tale lefte oute [with regard to this supposed
cancelled edn. by Wm. Thynne, see note by Mr. Bradshaw in
Thynne's Animadversions, ed. Furnivall, pp. 75-6]; and so
beinge printed agayne, some thynges were forsed to be
omitted, and the plowmans tale (supposed, but vntrulye, to be
made by olde Sir Thomas Wyat, father to hym which was
executed in the firste yere of Quene Marye, and not by Chaucer)
with much ado permitted to passe with the reste, in suche
sorte that in one open parliamente (as I haue herde Sir Johne
Thynne reporte, beinge then a member of the howse,) when
talke was had of Bookes to be forbidden, Chaucer had there
for euer byn condempned, had yt not byn that his woorkes had
byn counted but fables. Whereunto yf yoᵘ will replye, that
[p. 11] their colde not be any suche pilgrymes tale, because Chaucer in
his prologues makethe not mentione of anye suche personne,
which he wolde haue donne yf yt had byn so: for after that
