
154 [F. Thynne] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1598
iudgemente althoughe yoᵘ may iudge this tediouse discourse of
my father a needlesse thinge in setting forthe his diligence in
breaking the yce, and gyuinge lighte to others, who may moore
easeyly perfecte then begyne any thinge, for "facilius est
addere quam Inuenire": and so to other matters.
[Next Thynne details 15 mistakes made by Speght, of which
the following directly concern Chaucer, viz :—
[pp. 12-13] (1) He states that Richard Chaucer (the poet's grandfather)
was his father.
[pp. 14-15] (2) He says Heralds think Chaucer came of a mean house,
[p.17] (4) He conjectures (from merchants' arms in windows) that
because his armes are mean.— This “ys a slender coniecture".
[pp.18-19] (5) He misquotes Gower; who does not call Chaucer "a
Chaucer’s ancestors were merchants.—This has no validity.
worthye poet" nor "dothe he make hym iudge of his
Workes". But on the contrary Chaucer submits his works to
Gower in Troilus, book v. This error is Bales' and "yoᵘ have
swallowed yt".
[pp. 21-2] (7) He assumes that because in the Temple Records it
is noted that Chaucer beat a Franciscan Friar, that therefore
Gower belonged to the Temple as well as Chaucer; whereas
Thynne doubts whether Chaucer ever belonged to the Temple.
[p. 22] (8) He says he does not know the name of Chaucer's wife.
Nor does Thynne; for though some think it was Elizabeth,
a waiting woman to Queen Philippa, who had a grant of
a yearly stipend, ho believes this was Chaucer's sister or kins¬
woman, who became a nun at S. Helen’s, London.
[pp.27-30] Thynne then details mistakes made by Speght as to the
'Roman de la Rose' and Chaucer's 'Dreme'  or 'Dethe of
Blaunche the Duchesse'.
[pp 31-68] He then shows mistakes Speght has made in explaining
Chaucer's old words, and in annotations on, and corrections
of the text of Chaucer.— He then points out six more
mistakes :—
[pp. 68-9] (1) That Speght has wrongly placed the 'Plowman's Tale'
(before the Parson's Tale). Thynne’s father put it after the
Parson's Tale (which by Chaucer's own words was the last tale)
because he could not see by any prologues of the other tales
where else to place it. But it ought to"be sett in some other
place before the manciple and persons tale, and not as yt ys in
the last editione."]
(2) One other thinge ys, that yt wolde be good that
