1859. B. Geoffrey Chaucer, [in] The Dublin University Magazine,
March, 1859, vol. liii, pp. 272-87.
[p. 272] [An account of Chaucer's seven chief biographers and com¬
mentators—Leland, Thomas Speght, Thomas Fuller, Urry,
Tyrwhitt ("a gentlemanlike and learned dryasdust"), and
Sir Harris Nicolas:]
The copious Godwin closes the roll in his quartette of four
volumes, octavo. Doctor Johnson has no life of Chaucer, as he
has none of Shakspeare, or of Spenser. At times he celebrates
the owls, and passes by the eagles. There is a very full and
agrecable little book published ... in 1841, entitled "Chaucer
Modernized." It is a highly Philo-Chaucerian and chivalric
small volume, and sets out like Don Quixote ... bent on
righting wrongs on behalf of its poet against every translator
who had ventured to meddle with the ark of the antique text,
or the sacredness of the Saxon; and thus he casts out of the
saddle Messrs. Ogle, Lipscombe, and Boyce ... and runs a
tilt against Henry Brooke ... and is only half pleased with
Lord Thurlow, who revised and published "The Knight's
Tale"; also "the Flower and Leaf," which is the most beautiful
and pure of all Chaucer's works ...
[p. 278] Beyond all doubt his works are not known in proportion to
their great merit. The early English must be learned before
they can be enjoyed; ... the tongue of Chaucer has passed
away, except from the pages of works as old as his own.
Yet to his intense admirers, the difficulties of his language are
regarded as producing a kind of esoteric sacredness which
involves the text with a mystery akin to the Books of the
Sibyl ... His unintelligible obsoleteness, to minds so framed,
resembles the high flavour of an antique Stilton or the taste
of an æruginous coin; and one connoisseur [Landor, q.v.
above, 1841] has gone so far as to say "he would wish to
keep Chaucer for himself and a few friends."
[A life of the poet is given, containing the old inaccuracies,
due to acceptance of the apocryphal pieces.]
1859. Braune, George Martin. The Persone of a Toun.
[A poem (92 pp.) in imitation of the style and stanza of
Spenser, 'as a mean between the times of Chaucer and our
own,' but owing no more than the suggestion to Chaucer's
Parson.]