1868-70. Morris, William. The Earthly Paradise. Prologue: The
Wanderers, Part i, 1868, p. 3; L’Envoi, Part iv, 1870, pp. 439-442.
Forget six counties overhung with smoke,
Forget the snorting steam and piston stroke,
Forget the spreading of the hideous town;
Think rather of the pack-horse on the down,
And dream of London, small, and white and clean,
The clear Thames bordered by its gardens green;
Think, that below bridge the green lapping waves
Smite some few keels that bear Levantine staves,
Cut from the yew wood on the burnt-up hill,
And pointed jars that Greek hands toiled to fill,
And treasured scanty spice from some far sea,
Florence gold cloth, and Ypres napery,
And cloth of Bruges, and hogsheads of Guienne;
While nigh the thronged wharf Geoffrey Chaucer's pen
Moves over bills of lading—mid such times
Shall dwell the hollow puppets of my rhymes.
[p. 439] [L’Envoi. The poet addresses his book :]
Nay, let it pass, and hearken! Hast thou heard
That therein * I believe I have a friend,
Of whom for love I may not be afeard?
It is to him indeed I bid thee wend ...
Well, think of him, I bid thee, on the road,
And if it hap that midst of thy defeat,
Fainting beneath thy follies' heavy load,
*i.e. in "The Land of Matters Unforgot."
My Master, GEOFFREY CHAUCER, thou do meet,
Then shalt thou win a space of rest full sweet;
[p. 440] Then be thou bold, and speak the words I say,
The idle singer of an empty day!
"O Master, O thou great of heart and tongue,
Thou well mayst ask me why I wander here
In raiment rent of stories oft besung!
But of thy gentleness draw thou anear,
And then the heart of one that held thee dear
Mayst thou behold!" ...
[p. 441] O Master, if thine heart could love us yet,
Spite of things left undone, and wrongly done,
Some place in loving hearts then should we get,
For thou, sweet-souled, didst never stand alone,
But knew’st the joy and woe of many an one—
—By lovers dead, who live through thee, we pray,
Help thou us singers of an empty day!
Fearest thou, Book, what answer thou mayst gain
Lest he should scorn thee, and thereof thou die?
Nay, it shall not be.—Thou mayst toil in vain
And never draw the House of Fame anigh;
Yet he and his shall know whereof we cry,
Shall call it not ill-done to strive to lay
The ghosts that crowd about life’s empty day.