1855. Hunt, James Henry Leigh. [Preface to] Death and the Ruffians
modernized from Chaucer, [in] Stories in Verse, pp. 262-3.
[This modernization of the Pardoners Tale first appeared,
without a preface, in 1845, q.v. It is followed in Stories in
Verse by Cambus Khan, Hunt's second version of part of
the Squiers Tale, which first appeared in Horne’s Chaucer
Modernized, 1841. q.v.]
[p. 262] The reader will do me great injustice, if he thinks that
modernizations like these are intended as substitutes for
what they modernize. Their only plea for indulgence is, that
they may act as incitements towards acquaintance with the
great original. Chaucer's stories are all complete of their
kind, all interesting in their plots, and surprising in their
terminations; and the satirical stories are as full of amuse¬
ment, as the serious are of nobleness and pathos. It is
therefore scarcely possible to repeat any one of them, in any
way, without producing, in intelligent readers, a desire to
know more of him; and so far, and so far only, such ventures
as the first of the two following become excusable. I heartily
[p. 263] agree with those critics who are of opinion, that no modern¬
izations of Chaucer, however masterly they might be, could
do him justice; for either they must be little else but re¬
spellings (in which case they had better be wholly such at
once, like Mr. Clarke’s, and profess to be nothing but aids
to perusal), or, secondly, they must be something betwixt
old style and new, and so reap the advantages of neither
(which is the case, I fear, with the one just mentioned); or
lastly, like the otherwise admirable versions by Dryden and
Pope, they must take leave in toto of the old manner of the
original, and proceed upon the merits, whatever those may be,
of the style of the modernizers; in which case Chaucer is sure
to lose, not only in manner but in matter.
"Conscience," for example, is now a word of two syllables.
In Chaucer's time it was a word of three—Con-sci-ence. How
is a modern hand to fill up the concluding line in the character
of the Nun, without spoiling it?
"And all was con-sci-ence and tender heart."
"A tender heart" would not do at all; nor can you find any
monosyllable that would.
So, still more emphatically, in the use of the old negative
n’as (was not) in the exquisite couplet about the officious
lawyer—
"No where so busy a man as he there n’as."
(Pronounce noz),
"And yet he seemèd busier than he was."
Here the capital rhyme with those two smart peremptory
monsyllables (noz and woz) and consequently the perfection of
the couplet, and part of the very spirit of the wit, must be
lost in the necessity for turning the old words into new.