[n. a. 1864?] Pater, Walter Horatio. Conversation with Mr. Richard
C. Jackson, [in] The Life of Walter Pater, by Thomas Wright, 1907,
2 vols., vol. ii, pp. 267-8.
[p. 268] One day, when Pater and Mr. Jackson were visiting an
acquaintance, Pater chanced to take up a rather rare little book
called Chaucer Modernised. He remarked that he had never
seen it before, and frankly admitted that he was entirely
ignorant of the literature connected with Chaucer; that, more¬
over, of Chaucer himself and his work he knew very little.
"Of course," he added, “I have heard of the Canterbury Tales,
but I did not know that they were considered of sufficient
importance to be modernised."
[Mr. Jackson exclaims upon Pater's ignorance of English
literature, which however he finds natural in "a Tutor of
Oxford," and offers to shew him a work in his library which
cannot fail to open his eyes.]
Pater duly presented himself early one morning, and Mr.
Jackson placed before him the magnificent Black Letter
Chaucer above described [ed. Speght, 1598]. Opening the
book, Pater gave an exclamation of wonder and delight, and
all that day he sat poring over its pages, scarcely saying a
word.
[In the evening he made severe observations on the neglect
of English in education, concluding:]
"Books like this or facsimiles of them ought to be in all
schools and colleges." ... Then pointing to the portrait of
Chaucer he said : "This portrait, dight with heraldry, has as
much within it as a vast number of the so-called commentaries
of the Bible."
[It is obvious from the phrasing alone that this story is untrue as it stands. The
whole book is full of equal and even greater absurdities. But it may be based on
some real expression of regret on Pater's part at his ignorance of Chaucer, and is
perhaps worth quoting on that account.
If Pater was "a Tutor of Oxford" at the time, it must have been in or after 1864,
when he took his Fellowship at Brasenose.
Mr. Jackson had inherited Charles Lamb's library, and this may have been the
copy mentioned above, 1823. He also (Wright, vol. ii, p. 180) owned, and shewed to
Pater, Blake's original oil-sketch for the Canterbury Pilgrims.]