1856. Ruskin, John. The Harbours of England, [Illustrative text to
Turner's drawings,] pp. 6-8. (Works, Library edn., ed. E. T. Cook
and A. Wedderburn, 39 vols., 1903-12, vol. xiii, pp. 20-23.)
[p. 20] It is very interesting to note how repugnant every oceanic
[p. 21] idea appears to be to the whole nature of our principal
English mediæval poet, Chaucer. Read first The Man
of Lawe’s Tale, in which the Lady Constance is continually
floated up and down the Mediterranean, and the German
Ocean, in a ship by herself; carried from Syria all the way
to Northumberland, and there wrecked upon the coast;
thence yet again driven up and down among the waves for
five years, she and her child; and yet, all this while, Chaucer
does not let fall a single word descriptive of the sea, or
express any emotion whatever about it, or about the ship.
He simply tells us the lady sailed here and was wrecked
there; but neither he nor his audience appear to be capable
of receiving any sensation, but one of simple aversion, from
waves, ships, or sands. Compare with his absolutely apathetic
recital, the description by a modern poet of the sailing of a
vessel, charged with the fate of another Constance:
"It curled not Tweed alone, that breeze—
For far upon Northumbrian seas
It freshly blew, and strong;
... [to] The merry seamen laughed to see
Their gallant ship so lustily
Furrow the green sea foam."
[Marmion, ii 1.]
Now just as Scott enjoys this sea breeze, so does Chaucer
the soft air of the woods; the moment the older poet lands,
he is himself again, his poverty of language in speaking of
the ship is not because he despises description, but because
he has nothing to describe. Hear him upon the ground in
Spring:
"These woodes else recoveren greene,
That drie in winter ben to sene,
[p. 22]
[to] Through which the ground to praisen is."
[Rom. Rose, ll. 57-70.]
In like manner, wherever throughout his poems we find
Chaucer enthusiastic, it is on a sunny day in the "good
greenwood," but the slightest approach to the seashore makes
him shiver; and his antipathy finds at last positive expression,
and becomes the principal foundation of the Frankeleine's Tale,
in which a lady, waiting for her husband’s return in a castle
by the sea, behaves and expresses herself as follows :—
"Another time wold she sit and thinke,
[to] 'Why han ye wrought this werk unresonable?'"
[Frankeleyns T., 129-44.]
The desire to have the rocks out of her way is indeed severely
punished in the sequel of the tale; but it is not the less
[p. 23] characteristic of the age, and well worth meditating upon, in
comparison with the feelings of an unsophisticated modern
French or English girl among the black rocks of Dieppe or
Ramsgate.