1851. FitzGerald, Edward. Euphranor, a Dialogue on Youth, pp. 63-6,
70. (Letters and Literary Remains, ed. W. A. Wright, 1902-3,
7 vols., vol. vi, pp. 237-40, 243-4, 246-7.)
[p. 63]
[Quotation of Prol., Il. 79-100:
'With him there was his Sonn, a yongé Squire. ..
to
'And karft before his Fadir at the table.']
'Chaucer, however,' said Euphranor when he had finished
[p. 64] the passage, 'allows his young squire more accomplish¬
ments than you would trust him with, Doctor. See, he
dances, draws, and even writes songs–quite a petit maître.'
'But also,' I added, 'is of "grete strength," "fair y-rides,"
and had already "born him well in Chivauchie." Besides,' con¬
tinued I ... 'in those days, you know, there was scarce any
reading, which usurps so much of knighthood now. Men left
that to the clergy; contented, as we before agreed, to follow
their bidding to pilgrimages and holy wars. Some gentler
accomplishments were needed then to soften manners, just as
we want rougher ones to fortify ours. ...
[p. 65] 'And look at dear old Chaucer himself,' said I, 'how the
fresh air of the Kent hills, over which he rode four hundred
years ago, breathes in his verses still. They have a perfume
like fine old hay, that will not lose its sweetness, having been
cut and carried so fresh. All his poetry bespeaks a man of
sound mind and body.'
[p. 66] [Chaucer and Shakespeare men of business.]
[p. 70] [Tenderness of Chaucer and Shakespeare.]
[In May, 1882, FitzGerald caused to be printed 50 copies
of a revised edn. of Euphranor. In this the passage on p. 65
of the 1851 edn., quoted above, disappears; while another
is inserted, which concludes (p. 50) with the following
paragraph:]
"They [Pepys and Parson Adams] were both prefigured
among those Canterbury Pilgrims so many years before," said I.
"Only think of it! Some nine-and-twenty, I think, 'by
aventure yfalle in feleweship,' High and Low, Rich and Poor,
Saint and Sinner, Cleric and Lay, Knight, Ploughman,
Prioress, Wife of Bath, Shipman, hunting Abbot-like Fryar,
Poor Parson (Adams' Progenitor) — Webster (Pepys’)—on
rough-riding 'Stot' or ambling Palfrey, marshall'd by mine
Host of the Tabard to the music of the Miller’s Bag-pipes, on
their sacred errand to St. Thomas'; and one among them
taking note of all in Verse still fresh as the air of those
Kentish hills they travelled over on that April morning four
hundred years ago."
[Corresponding to the passing allusion on p. 70 of edn. 1851
to 'the whole familiar tenderness of this very Shakspeare and
Chaucer of ours' is (pp. 53-4) the following:]
"Wordsworth ?" said I—a man of the Milton rather than
of the Chaucer and Shakspeare type–without humour, like
the rest of his Brethren of the Lake."
"Not but he loves Chaucer as much as you can, Doctor,
for those fresh touches of Nature, and tenderness of Heart—
insomuch that he has re-cast the Jew of Lincoln's Story into
a form more available for modern readers."
"And successfully?"
"Ask Lexilogus— Ah! I forgot that he never read
Chaucer..."
author of The Broad Stone of Honour, to Chaucer’s Squire in
[On p. 56 is added a comparison of Sir Kenelm Digby,
physical strength, and to Chaucer himself in his eye for
humours.]