1865. Maurice, Frederick Denison. On Books, [a lecture delivered
Nov. 1865, printed in] The Friendship of Books and other
Lectures, 1874, pp. 76-7.
[pp. 76- Chaucer was possibly the friend of Wycliffe—certainly
7]
shared many of his sympathies and antipathies. He loved
the priest, or, as he was called, the secular priest, who went
among the people, and cared for them as his fellow-country-
men; he intensely disliked the friars, who flattered them and
cursed them, and in both ways governed them and degraded
them. His education had been different from Wycliffe's, his
early poetical powers had been called forth by the ladies and
gentlemen of the court. He mingled much French with his
speech, as they did; he acquired from them a kind of
acquaintance with life which Wycliffe could not obtain in
the Oxford schools. Had he remained under their influence
he might have been merely a very musical court singer; but
he entered into fellowship with common citizens. He became
a keen observer of all the different forms of life and society
in his time—a keen observer, and, as all such are, genial,
friendly, humorous, able to understand men about him by
sympathising with them, able to understand the stories of the
past by his experience of the present. Without being a
reformer like Wycliffe, he helped forward the Reformation
by making men acquainted with themselves and their fellows,
by stripping off disguises, and by teaching them to open
their eyes to the beautiful world which lay about them.
Chaucer is the genuine specimen of an English poet—a type
of the best who were to come after him; with cordial affection
for men and for nature; often tempted to coarseness, often
yielding to his baser nature in his desire to enter into all the
different experiences of men; apt through this desire, and
through his hatred of what was insincere, to say many things
of which he had need to repent, and of which he did repent;
but never losing his loyalty to what was pure, his reverence
for what was divine. ... The English books which live
through ages are those which connect themselves with human
life and action. His other poems, though graceful and
harmonious, are only remembered, because in his "Canter-
bury Tales" he has come directly into contact with the
hearts and thoughts, the sufferings and sins, of men and
women, and has given the clearest pictures we possess of all
the distinctions and occupations in his own day.