1871. Brooke, Stopford Augustus. The Descriptive Poetry of Chaucer,
[in] Macmillan’s Magazine, Aug. 1871, vol. xxiv, pp. 268-79.
[p. 269] The landscape of Chaucer is sometimes taken from the
Italian and sometimes from the French landscape. It possesses
almost always the same elements, differently mixed up in
different poems: a May morning—the greenwood, or a
garden—some clear running water—meadows covered with
flowers—some delectable place or other with an arbour laid
down with soft and fresh-cut turf. There is no sky, except in
such rapid allusions as this, "Bright was the day and blue the
firmament;" no cloud studies; no conception of the beauty of
wild nature.
His range, therefore, is extremely limited; but within the
limits his landscape is exquisitely fresh, natural, and true in
spite of its being conventional.
[p. 272] [Chaucer's love of colour.] But of all the colours which
Chaucer loved in nature, he loved best the harmony of white
and green in one of his favourite daisied meadows. ...
It may be in an age when colours in art had each their
peculiar religious significance, that Chaucer, a man who had
travelled in Italy and who had himself the instinct of sym¬
[p. 273] bolism, had some spiritual meaning in the constant association
of these two colours of white and green. Green, the hue of
spring, signified hope, and particularly the hope of Immor¬
tality; white was the emblem, among other things, of light
and joy. ...
Still dwelling on Chaucer's colour, it is curious the number
of concentrated pictures which are to be found in his
poems, pictures so sharply drawn in colour that they might
be at once painted from the description. He looks in and
the arbour is full of scarlet flowers, and down among them,
sore wounded, "a man in black and white colour, pale and
wan," is lying, bitterly complaining. Scarlet, black, white,
one sees that, "flashing upon the inward eye," not in outline,
nor in detail, but in colour, and that is the test whether a poet
is a good colourist or not. It is no common excellence. ...
There is a splendid study of colour, unequalled in its way
in our literature, in Chaucer's picture of the cock in the
"Nun’s Priests Tale." The widow keeps in her yard a famous
stock of poultry,
"In which she had a cock, hight Chaunticlere [to]
And lik the burnischt gold was his colour."
[p. 274] This simple childlikeness and intensity of Chaucer ...
are the first necessity of a poetic nature, ... This is the first
of those elements of his poetry which make his landscapes
impossible to be painted.
Of two other unpaintable things the landscape is also full—
of the scent of flowers, and the songs of birds, and now and
then of the noise of water.