1855. Milman, Henry Hart. History of Latin Christianity, vol. vi, pp.
432, 536, 545-550; 3rd edition, 1864, vol. ix, pp. 97, 232-3, 244-50.
[p. 224] [Outlines of Chaucer's biography, with mention of the
tradition that he was present at the wedding of Lionel and
Violante Visconti at Milan, and there met Petrarch. Sir Harris
Nicolas cited.]
[p. 245] Chaucer was master of the whole range of vernacular poetry,
which was bursting forth in such young and prodigal vigour,
in the languages born from the Romance Latin. He had read
Dante, he had read Petrarch; to Boccaccio he owed the ground¬
work of two of his best poems—The Knight's Tale ... and
Griselidis. I cannot but think that he was familiar with the
Troubadour poetry of the Langue d’Oc; of the Langue d’Oil,
he knew well the knightly tales of the Trouvères and the
Fabliaux, as well as the later allegorical school, which was
then in the height of its fashion in Paris.
[References to Man of Law’s Tale, Troilus, Squieres Tale,
Knightes Tale, Frankeleyns Tale, Clerkes Tale, Merchantes
Tale, Milleres Tale, Reves Tale, Sir Thopas, Nonnes Prestes
Tale, Rom. Rose, Hous of Fame.]
[p. 246] Yet all the while Chaucer in thought, in character, in
language is English—resolutely, determinately, almost boastfully
English [footnote: quotation from Testament of Love in sup¬
[p. 247] port of this]. The creation of native poetry was his deliberate
aim; and already, that broad, practical, humorous yet serious
view of life, of life in its infinite variety, that which reaches its
height in Shakespeare, has begun to reveal itself in Chaucer.
The Canterbury Tales, even in the Preface, represent, as in a
moving comedy, the whole social state of the times; they
display human character in action as in speech; and that
character is the man himself. . . . There is an example of every
order and class of society, high, low, secular, religious. As yet
each is distinct in his class, as his class from others. Contrast
Chaucer's pilgrims with the youths and damsels of Boccaccio.
Exquisitely as these are drawn, and in some respects finely
touched, they are all of one gay light class; almost any one
might tell any tale with equal propriety; they differ in name,
in nothing else.
In his religious characters, if not in his religious tales ...
Chaucer is by no means the least happy. In that which is
purely religious the poet himself is profoundly religious; in
his Prayer to the Virgin, written for the Duchess Blanche
of Lancaster, for whom also he poured forth his sad elegy; in
his Gentle Martyrs, S. Constantia and S. Cecilia: he is not
without his touch of bigotry, as has been said in Hugh of
Lincoln. But the strong Teutonic good sense of Chaucer had
[p. 248] looked more deeply into the whole monastic and sacerdotal
system. His wisdom betrays itself in his most mirthful, as in
his coarsest humour. He who drew the Monk, the Pardoner,
the Friar Limitour, the Summoner, had seen far more than the
outer form, the worldliness of the Churchmen, the abuse of
indulgences, the extortions of the friars, the licentiousness of
the Ecclesiastical Courts, of the Ecclesiastics themselves; he
had penetrated into the inner depths of the religion. Yet his
wisdom, even in his most biting passages, is tempered with
charity. Though every order, the Abbot, the Prioress, the
Friar, the Pardoner, the Summoner, are impersonated to the
life, with all their weaknesses, follies, affectations, even vices
and falsehoods, in unsparing freedom, in fearless truth, yet none
or hardly one, is absolutely odious. ... The Summoner, whose
[p. 249] office and the Archdeacon's Court in which he officiated seem to
have been most unpopular, is drawn in the darkest colours, with
his fire-red cherubim’s face, lecherous, venal, licentious. Above
all, the Parish Priest of Chaucer has thrown off Roman mediæval
sacerdotalism; he feels his proper place; he arrays himself
only in the virtues which are the essence of his holy function.
This unrivalled picture is the most powerful because the most
quiet, uninsulting, unexasperating satire. Chaucer's Parish
Priest might have been drawn from Wycliffe ... not at
Oxford ... but the affectionate and beloved teacher of his
humble flock. ... [The rest of the Chaucerian passage refers
to incidents and subjects connected with Chaucer only by the
acceptance of the Testament of Love as his.]