1873. Furnivall, Frederick James. Recent Work at Chaucer, [in] Mac¬
millan’s Magazine, March, 1873, vol. xxvii, pp. 383-93.
[p. 383] Taking it ... for granted that the study of Early English
has revived and is spreading, though miserably slowly, in
England and elsewhere, let us ask what that study has done for
Chaucer, that tenderest, brightest, most humourful sweet soul,
of all the great poets of the world, whom a thousand Englishmen
out of every thousand and one are content to pass by with a
shrug and a sneer.
[pp.383- [The gradual settling of the Chaucer canon which had been
7]
confused by Stowe and other early editors. Tyrwhitt’s con¬
tribution to this. Nicolas and the biographical facts.
Bradshaw's and ten Brink's work on the text; the rhyme¬
tests. The French and Italian periods first distinguished by
ten Brink.]
[p. 387] [The Compleynte to Pite the key to Chaucer's early sad
poetry, telling of his own unhappy love.]
[pp.388- [A suggested chronological list of the works in four periods,
9]
and an order of dates for the Canterbury Tales "not yet quite
fully worked out. Thus far had one got when Mr. Hales
supplied the generalization wanted— 'Power of characterization
is the true test. ... The Tales too that take half-views of
life, like the Clerk’s ... the Man of Law's ... must be
before the best time too.'"
[p. 389] With this guide every reader can work out the succession
of the Tales for himself, and mix them with the Minor Poems
as ranged above. He will then see Chaucer, not only out¬
wardly as he was in the flesh—page, soldier, squire,
diplomatist, Custom-house officer, Member of Parliament, then
a suppliant for protection and favour, a beggar for money;
but inwardly as he was in the spirit—clear of all nonsense of
Courts of Love, etc.—gentle and loving, early timid and in
despair, sharing others' sorrow, and, by comforting them,
losing part of his own; yet long dwelling on the sadness of
forsaken love, seeking the "consolation of philosophy,"
watching the stars, praying to the “Mother of God"; studying
books, and, more still, woman's nature; his eye open to all
the beauties of the world around him, his ear to the "heavenly
harmony" of birds' song; at length becoming the most
gracious and tender spirit, the sweetest singer, the best
pourtrayer, the most pathetic, and withal the most genial
and humourful healthy-souled man that England had ever
seen. Still, after 500 years, he is bright and fresh as the
glad light green of the May he so much loved; he is still
second only to Shakespeare in England, and fourth only to
him and Dante and Homer in the world. When will our
Victorian time love and honour him as it should? Surely, of
all our poets he is the one to come home to us most.
[p. 389]
[pp. 389
[Contrast between Chaucer and Tennyson.]
-90]
[The change in Chaucer marked by the development of
[pp. 390
humour.]
-3]
[The work of the Chaucer Society; the Six-text Edition; a
comparison of the MSS. made the Tales fall into their proper
places in the pilgrimage, and prepared the way for a real
edition. The Society’s other texts and studies. An appeal
for support.]
[Dr. Furnivall’s copy of his article with important additions
and alterations, is in the possession of the editor. One of
Dr. Furnivall’s additions reads thus:]
One may fairly claim then, for the Chaucer Society the
credit of having, with Mr. Bradshaw’s and Prof. ten Brink's
help, done the best work at and for Chaucer that has been
done since his death. It has explained the secret of his early
life, cleared his memory from the reproach of having written
many unworthinesses, and of having muddled his greatest
work; it has laid the sure founda tions for a fitting edition of
one of the greatest poets of mankind, and has made plainer to
modern English ears the music, to modern English eyes the
sunny soul, that cheered our ancestors in Wicliffe's day.