1862. Child, Francis James. Observations on the Language of Chaucer
[in the] Memoirs of the American Academy, new ser., vol. viii,
1863, pp. 445-502. [Rearranged and reprinted by A. J. Ellis in
Early English Pronunciation, 1869-75, q.v., below.]
[This is the first minute and scholarly analysis of Chaucer's
language, and it marks an epoch in the study of the poet, for
it made possible the full solution of the question of the right
scansion of the Canterbury Tales. It consists of classified
lists of Chaucer’s vocabulary and grammatical forms, and is
preceded by an introductory note:]
[pp. 445- [Wright’s edn. of the Canterbury Tales employed, as being
6]
based on a single good MS. and fairly accurate. The prevalent
ignorance of the English language of that period.]
[p. 446] We are a long way off from a knowledge of the English of
the fourteenth century, and still further from a satisfactory
edition of Chaucer.
Indeed, there is reason to doubt (and the editors may find
some comfort in the thought) whether there ever was an
accurate copy of a poem by Chaucer, except his own, or a
manuscript corrected by his hand. Certainly this would not
be an absolutely extravagant inference from what he says
"unto his own Scrivener."
Adam Scrivener was only the first in a long line of cor¬
rupters ... Adam may have been heedless and stupid, but
... he might justly plead the unsettled state of the language
in part excuse. It was undoubtedly very hard for an humble
scribe to remember and observe all the nice differences between
[p. 447] the courtly style of his patron and the vulgar dialect ... Chaucer
thought the prospect of his verses being preserved as he wrote
them very unpromising and he expresses his apprehension
thus... [Troilus, v, 1793-6].
his verses was a thousand times justified by the course of
This anxiety of Chaucer about the writing and reading of
events. [The copyists and editors. Tyrwhitt's textual prin¬
ciple his weak point. A new edition undesirable until an
editor arises who will make thorough work with the MSS.
[p.449] That diversity in English which made Chaucer apprehensive
Bell’s edition likely to block the way for a good while.]
of damage to his verses may have been so considerable, that
we could not be sure of restoring them to perfect purity, even
if we had several manuscripts of the date 1400 before us. But
by far the larger part of the irregularities and corruptions with
vhich the text is now loaded are undoubtedly of later origin,
and there is no reason why, (if we are allowed only to take for
granted that Chaucer had an ear, and meant to write good
metre,+) by taking pains enough, by a patient comparison of
[p. 450] apparently uncorrupted verses, followed by a collation of good
contemporary manuscripts, and of the forms of earlier and
contemporary authors, we should not at last obtain a text
approximately correct.
[p.449 +[Child’s note.] Of course, unless Chaucer wrote good metre, there
n.] is an end to all inquiry into the forms of his language. Nothing can
be more absurd than Dr. Nott’s theory upon this point... or more
[p. 450 just than Tyrwhitt’s remarks... Is it not surprising... that a man
n.] of sense and taste should write as follows? "At the same time, many
of his lines evidently consist... of ten syllables only; and such a
construction of verse, for ordinary purposes, is become so much more
agreeable to modern usage and taste, that his poetry had better be so read
whenever it can be done, even at the cost of thereby somewhat violating the
exactness of the ancient pronunciation."—Craik’s Hist. Eng. Lit. i. 249.