
96 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1868–
A Temporary Preface to the Six-Text Edition of Chaucer's
[In 1868 Dr. Furnivall published separately (2nd ser. 3):
Canterbury Tales, attempting to shew the true order of the
Tales, and the days and stages of the pilgrimage, etc., etc.]
of the sequence of the Tales as set forth in the Six-Text
[See Skeat's Evolution of the Canterbury Tales for a study
edition. Each of the texts constituting the Six-Text edition
was printed separately, for editorial use, 1868-77: Child
himself had conceived the idea of printing a six or eight-
text Chaucer. See the notice of a note on the subject in the
Reader, under 1865, Furnivall (?)]
as being generally accessible and known to members of the Society.]
[Later publications ot the Chaucer Society have for the most part been omitted,
1868-70. Morris, William. The Earthly Paradise. Prologue: The
Wanderers, Part i, 1868, p. 3; L’Envoi, Part iv, 1870, pp. 439-442.
Forget six counties overhung with smoke,
Forget the snorting steam and piston stroke,
Forget the spreading of the hideous town;
Think rather of the pack-horse on the down,
And dream of London, small, and white and clean,
The clear Thames bordered by its gardens green;
Think, that below bridge the green lapping waves
Smite some few keels that bear Levantine staves,
Cut from the yew wood on the burnt-up hill,
And pointed jars that Greek hands toiled to fill,
And treasured scanty spice from some far sea,
Florence gold cloth, and Ypres napery,
And cloth of Bruges, and hogsheads of Guienne;
While nigh the thronged wharf Geoffrey Chaucer's pen
Moves over bills of lading—mid such times
Shall dwell the hollow puppets of my rhymes.
[p. 439] [L’Envoi. The poet addresses his book :]
Nay, let it pass, and hearken! Hast thou heard
That therein * I believe I have a friend,
Of whom for love I may not be afeard?
It is to him indeed I bid thee wend ...
Well, think of him, I bid thee, on the road,
And if it hap that midst of thy defeat,
Fainting beneath thy follies' heavy load,
*i.e. in "The Land of Matters Unforgot."
