
1870] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Baynes.] 105
'Canterbury Tales,' he agreed with Mr. Wright in thinking
the Harleian text the best, and it has accordingly been
selected and faithfully adhered to throughout. Clerical
errors and corrupt readings were corrected by collation with
other manuscripts, especially the Lansdowne, and a careful
examination of Mr. Morris’s text will show how painstaking
he has been in this part of his work. The rest of the poems
have been edited from the manuscripts where they existed,
and the result is the best text of Chaucer that has yet
appeared. ...
A comparison of Mr. Morris’s text of the 'Prologue' and
the 'Knight’s Tale' with the texts of the Society, has,
however, convinced us that the question as to possible
improvement must be answered decisively in the affirmative.
Knowing beforehand the excellence of the Harleian text, and
the general agreement of the six other manuscripts, we have
[p. 16] been surprised indeed at the number of emendations of
greater or less importance they afford. In the 'Prologue'
alone there are, in our judgment, upwards of fifty lines that
may be improved by collation either in sense or metre, while
in the 'Knight’s Tale' the better readings are in proportion
to its length even more numerous and important. These
better readings affect mainly the metre, the meaning, or the
poetical expressiveness of the existing text. Some, again,
effect marked improvements in minutiæ of grammar, em¬
phasis, and spelling.
[pp. 16-33] [Examples are given and various readings discussed.]
[p.33] Quite as much still remains to be done for the illustration as
for the text of Chaucer’s poetical works. There are in his
writings almost innumerable points of philological, literary,
or historical interest that require to be elucidated. Chaucer
was not only familiar with every phase of contemporary life,
but profoundly read in all existing literature. He knew by
intimate personal experience the tastes and habits, the
pursuits and recreations, the superstitions and beliefs, of all
ranks and classes amongst his own countrymen; and his
public employments had enlarged the field of his observation
so as to include almost every country in Europe. He had
seen active military service abroad, and had taken part in
splendid public ceremonials at home; had lived habitually
