
1867] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 89
printed texts. It will deal with the works of no other man—
except so far as may be found necessary for the illustration of
Chaucer—and will be dissolved as soon as all the good manu¬
scripts of the poet's works, and all matter wanted for their
illustration, are in type. It is not intended to interfere with
any edition of Chaucer's works, past or future, but to sup¬
plement them all, and afford material for the improvement of
his text. Eight or ten years will suffice, if the Society be well
supported, to finish its work.
If men said it was well done for Lord Vernon to reprint the
first four printed texts of Dante's"Divina Commedia"—if we
know it is well done of the Early English Text Society to
print the three versions of Chaucer's great contemporary’s
work, William Langland’s "Vision of Piers Ploughman"—it
cannot be ill done of us to print all the best MSS. of him who
is allowed to be the greatest among our early men. ... It is
hardly too much to say that every line of Chaucer contains
points that need reconsideration. Our proposal then is to
begin with "The Canterbury Tales," and to give of them (in
parallel columns in royal 4to) six of the best unprinted manu¬
scripts known, and to add in another quarto the six next best
MSS., if 300 subscribers join the Society. The first six MSS.
to be printed will probably be, The Lansdowne (Brit. Mus.),—
The best Ashburnham (if Lord Ashburnham will consent to its
publication; if not, the best Sloane),—The Ellesmere,—The
Hengwrt,—The best Oxford (probably the Corpus MS.),—The
best Cambridge (Univ. Libr.).
In securing the fidelity of the texts, Mr. Richard Morris,
Mr. J. W. Hales, myself, and others (who will form the
Committee of the Society) will take part. The first essay in
illustration of Chaucer's works that will be published by
the Society will be, "A detailed Comparison of Chaucer's
'Knight’s Tale' with the 'Teseide' of Boccaccio," by Henry
Ward, Esq., of the MS. Department of the British Museum ...
The Society will begin its work on the 1st of January,
1868. Professor Child gives 50l. to start it ...
Members' names and subscriptions may be sent pro tempore
to yours, &c.
FREDK. J. FURNIVALL,
3, Old Square, Lincoln's Inn, W.C.
P.S. — An honorary secretary who cares enough for
