
106 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1870
in courts, camps and great cities, as well as in the congenial
[p. 34] retirement of country life. The whole world of nature and
human experience was in this way mirrored in his sunny
intellect, while the higher influences of both had melted
serenely into the quiet depths of his curiously meditative
and observant mind. As a natural result there is a mellowed
fulness in his maturer delineations; a joyous animation, a
living truth, a variety and completeness of detail in his pictures
of life that obscure at first the purely literary or academical
accomplishments of his mind; or rather, perhaps, it would be
more correct to say that in his later works the learning and
knowledge of life are so fused by imaginative sympathy into
a new poetical whole, that there is at first no distinct con¬
sciousness of the separate elements. ... On closer ex¬
amination, however, the range and minuteness of Chaucer's
learning becomes clearly apparent. He employed materials
derived from all existing literatures home and foreign; not
only the early English chronicles and stories, the Norman-
French romances and fables, the new epic and Iyrical poetry
of Italy, and the whole range of Latin literature, including
not only the classics proper, as well as the science and art,
the history and philosophy ot the time, but also Byzantine
legends and brilliant fragments of Eastern romance, that
had passed into Europe in the wake of the returning
Crusaders. The adequate illustration of Chaucer thus re¬
quires, in addition to a minute acquaintance with the state
of the language in his day, a full knowledge of con¬
temporary literature and history. No single editor has as
yet united these requirements. Tyrwhitt, who studied with
some care the literature and history of the fourteenth
century, was comparatively ignorant of Chaucer’s language;
while recent editors, such as Mr. Wright and Mr. Morris,
who are well acquainted with Chaucer’s language, have
attempted hardly anything in the way of literary or historical
illustration.
But the primary requirement of all expository criticism
of Chaucer is undoubtedly the full interpretation ot his
language. ... There is still, however, a great deal to be
done for the elucidation of Chaucer's language; and, un¬
fortunately, Mr. Morris, who of living scholars is in many
