
1873] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 115
and others published notes, etc., frequently in the Academy
and less frequently in the Athenæum.]
1873. Hales, John Wesley. Chaucer and Shakespeare, [in] the Quarterly
Review, Jan. 1873, vol. cxxxiv, pp. 225-255. (Reprinted in Notes
and Essays on Shakespeare, by John W. Hales, 1884, pp. 56-104.)
[p. 226] [An account of the Chaucer Society and the work of
Furnivall.]
[p. 227] Chaucer and Shakespeare have much in common. How¬
ever diverse the form of their greatest works, yet in spirit
there is a remarkable likeness and sympathy. Their geniuses
differ rather in degree than in kind. Chaucer is in many
respects a lesser Shakespeare. [Immaturity of the drama
as a literary form in Chaucer's day] ... Chaucer stands in
relation to the supreme Dramatic Age in a correspondent
position to that held by Scott. Chaucer lived in the morning
twilight of it, Scott in the evening. There can be little
doubt that both would have added to its lustre—that England
would have boasted one more, and Scotland at least one
great dramatist had they been born earlier and later
respectively. ...
[p. 230] Probably it was these piteous, but seemingly not inevi¬
table or reproachless, distresses [embarrassments due to
attachment to a court party] that impeded the completion
of the "Canterbury Tales." The original design, indeed,
is in itself too vast for realisation. Chaucer commits the
same error in this respect as Spenser does.
[p. 231] We have said that his genius exhibits a remarkable affinity
to that of Shakespeare—a closer affinity, we think, than that
of any other English poet. To Chaucer belongs in a high
measure what marks Shakespeare supremely—a certain
indefinable grace and brightness of style, an incomparable
archness and vivacity, an incessant elasticity and freshness,
an indescribable ease, a never faltering variety, an incapability
of dulness. ...
For skill in characterization who can be ranked between
Chaucer and Shakespeare? Is there any work, except the
'theatre' of Shakespeare, that attempts, with a success
in any way comparable, the astonishing task which Chaucer
sets himself? He attempts to portray the entire society
of his age from the crown ot its head to the sole ot its foot—
