
1865] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion 77
1865. Furnivall, Frederick James. Chaucer and Arthur, [review of
Thynne's Animadversions, ed. Kingsley, and Morte Arthure, ed.
Perry (E.E.T.S.), in] The Reader, 18 November, 1865, pp. 565-6.
We put Chaucer before Arthur, for we care more about
him; the more we read him the more we love him, sunning
ourselves in the bright sheen of his humour, and sniffing the
fragrance of his verse, as on a bright spring day on his own
Kent downs. The old man is the foremost and most
glowing figure of all the troop of our early writers; and,
of all, he is the one we can take closest home to ourselves,
for he has written himself in his books, if ever writer has,
and we know the man from soul to skin.
1865. Hook, Walter Farquhar. Lives of the Archbishops of Canterbury,
1860-76, 12 vols., vol. iii, 1865, pp. 37n., 40-1, 47, 67, 69n.
[p. 67] [Against Chaucer's evidence of the demoralisation of the
clergy of his time must be set his picture of a parish priest.]
[p. 69] [Identification of Chaucer's good priest with Wyclif im¬
possible; if intended by Chaucer, it must have been as a
masked sarcasm. Robert Bell quoted. Further improbability
"that the gay and licentious poet should have been intimate
with the reformer."]
1865. Kingsley, George Henry. Chaucer. Animaduersions ... by
Francis Thynne ... edited by G. H. Kingsley, Early English
Text Soc., pp. iv, vi, viii, ix, xi, xii.
[p. xi] The old story of Chaucer's having been fined for beating
a Franciscan friar in Fleet Street is doubted by Thynne,
though hardly, I think, on sufficient grounds. Tradition
(when it agrees with our own views) is not lightly to be
disturbed, and remembering with what more than feminine
powers of invective "spiritual" men seem to be not unfre¬
quently endowed, and also how atrociously insolent a Fran¬
ciscan friar would be likely to be (of course from the best
motives) to a man like Chaucer, who had burnt into the
very soul of monasticism with the caustic of his wit, I shall
continue to believe the legend for the present. If the
mediæval Italians are to be believed, the cudgelling of a friar
was occasionally thought necessary even by the most faithful,
and I see no reason why hale Dan Chaucer should not have
lost his temper on sufficient provocation.
