
1864] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 71
poet the island produced; and he wrote for the most part in
the language of the people.... In his earlier poems he was
under the influence of the Provençal Troubadours, and in his
"Flower and the Leaf" and other works of a similar class, he
riots in allegory.... He lived in a brilliant and stirring
time; he was connected with the court; he served in armies;
he visited the Continent; and, although a silent man, he
carried with him, wherever he went, and into whatever
[p. 69] company he was thrown, the most observant eyes perhaps that
ever looked curiously out upon the world. ... And so it was
that, after mixing in kings' courts, and sitting with friars in
taverns, and talking with people on country roads, and travel¬
ling in France and Italy, and making himself master of the
literature, science, and theology of his time, and when perhaps
touched with misfortune and sorrow, he came to see the depth
of interest that resides in actual life. ... It is difficult to
define Chaucer's charm. He does not indulge in fine senti¬
ments; he has no bravura passages; he is ever master of him¬
self and of his subject. The light upon his page is the light
[p. 70] of common day.... It is his shrewdness, his conciseness, his
ever-present humour, his frequent irony, and his short homely
line—effective as the play of the short Roman sword—which
strikes the reader most. [Chaucer and Fielding compared in
their common-sense and English relish for fact.] Chaucer was
a Conservative in all his feelings; he liked to poke his fun at
the clergy, but he was not of the stuff of which martyrs are
made...
[p. 71]
Chaucer was born about 1328, and died about 1380.
[Probably reprinted from a review. Irving's History a Scottish Poetry (1860) is
spoken of (p. 75) as "published the other day."]
1864. Works. [Projected editions]
[In 1864 Professor Earle, W. Aldis Wright and Henry
Bradshaw undertook to edit for the Clarendon Press a standard
library edition of Chaucer. Work on it was in progress in
1866 and 1867. In 1870 Professor Earle gave up the editor¬
ship-in-chief, and, after refusals by Aldis Wright and Skeat,
Bradshaw accepted it, but soon found that he had not the
time.
Also in 1864 Alexander Macmillan proposed to Bradshaw a
small edition in the Globe series. So late as 1879, in con¬
junction with Furnivall, Bradshaw had some specimen pages
