
1855] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 21
[c. 1855?] Dixon, Richard Watson. A Wedding Scene from Chaucer.
to H. C. Beeching, Dict. Nat. Biog., 1st Suppl., vol. ii, 1901,
[A painting, the only one of Dixon's that survives, according
p. 139. Dixon was a college friend of William Morris and
Burne-Jones, and no doubt shared their readings in Chaucer
(see below, 1855, Morris). Dean Beeching further notes (ib.
p. 140) that 'Dixon had a great look of Chaucer as he appears
in Hoccleve's portrait, and the resemblance was more than
external, reaching to a characteristic and humorous interest in
all sorts and conditions of people.' That the same resemblance
was also noticed in Morris and in D. G. Rossetti (q.v. above,
1845, F. M. Brown) is perhaps only a sign of the enthusiasm
of the Pre-raphaelites for Chaucer.]
1855. Dobell, Sydney Thompson. America, [printed in] Poetical Works.
1875, 2 vols., vol. i, p. 235.
Ye shall be
Lords of an Empire wide as Shakespeare’s soul,
Sublime as Milton's immemorial theme,
And rich as Chaucer's speech, and fair as Spencer's dream.
1855. Hunt, James Henry Leigh. Beaumont and Fletcher, or, The
Finest Scenes, Lyrics and other Beauties of those two Poets . .
with ... notes and ... preface by Leigh Hunt, pp. 288 n., 294n.
[p. 288] [The Two Noble Kinsmen.]
Who dost pluck
With arm armipotent, etc.
A most magnificent image. The epithet armipotent is from
Chaucer, and employed in a manner not unworthy of that ill¬
understood master of versification. Chaucer took it from
Boccaccio, but turned it from prose into poetry, by putting
it in a right place :—
Vide in questa la casa del suo Dio
Armipotente, ed essa edificata
Tutta d’acciajo isplendido e pulio.
Teseide, lib. vii. st. 32.
And downward from an hill, under a bent,
There stood the temple of Mars armipotent,
Wrought all of burned stele, etc.
[This example, from the Two Nobel Kinsmen, of the use ot "armipotent" is not
given in the New English Dictionary, one from 'Fairfax's Tasso, 1600, being given for
this period. It is probable that the word has never been used in English without
conscious reference to the passage from the Knightes Tale quoted by Leigh Hunt
above.]
