
1856] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 33
Masaccio, Florence in the fifteenth; Tintoret, Venice in the
sixteenth: all of them utterly regardless of anachronism and
minor error of every kind, but getting always vital truth out
of the vital present.
. . . . . . . . . . .
[p. 273] It is quite true that this [horror of a forest] is partly a char¬
acteristic, not merely of Dante, or of mediæval writers, but of
southern writers; for the simple reason that the forest, being with
them higher upon the hills, and more out of the way than in the
north, was generally a type of lonely and savage places; while
in England, the 'greenwood,' coming up to the very walls of the
towns, it was possible to be 'merry in the good greenwood,'
in a sense which an Italian could not have understood. Hence
Chaucer, Spenser, and Shakspere send their favorites per¬
petually to the woods for pleasure or meditation; and trust
their tender Canace, or Rosalind, or Helena, or Silvia, or
Belphœbe, where Dante would have sent no one but a con¬
demned spirit.
1856. Ruskin, John. The Harbours of England, [Illustrative text to
Turner's drawings,] pp. 6-8. (Works, Library edn., ed. E. T. Cook
and A. Wedderburn, 39 vols., 1903-12, vol. xiii, pp. 20-23.)
[p. 20] It is very interesting to note how repugnant every oceanic
[p. 21] idea appears to be to the whole nature of our principal
English mediæval poet, Chaucer. Read first The Man
of Lawe’s Tale, in which the Lady Constance is continually
floated up and down the Mediterranean, and the German
Ocean, in a ship by herself; carried from Syria all the way
to Northumberland, and there wrecked upon the coast;
thence yet again driven up and down among the waves for
five years, she and her child; and yet, all this while, Chaucer
does not let fall a single word descriptive of the sea, or
express any emotion whatever about it, or about the ship.
He simply tells us the lady sailed here and was wrecked
there; but neither he nor his audience appear to be capable
of receiving any sensation, but one of simple aversion, from
waves, ships, or sands. Compare with his absolutely apathetic
recital, the description by a modern poet of the sailing of a
vessel, charged with the fate of another Constance:
"It curled not Tweed alone, that breeze—
For far upon Northumbrian seas
CHAUCER CRITICISM.—III.
