
1852] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 9
[p. 342] [Chaucer, by the copious admission of Norman-French
elements, completed and transformed 'our homely meagre
Semi-Saxon into a civilised and living speech.']
1852. Edgar, Andrew. Popular Literature, [in] Tusculana, pp. 116,
118-19, 127-8.
[p. 118] We never rise from their perusal [i. e. of the Canterbury
[p. 119] phraseology, their popularity at the present day would be un¬
Tales] without a conviction that, but for their antique
bounded. . . They present to us men as they were, and in
truth, as they always will be. . . The masterly narrative of
Hume conveys but an imperfect notion of those times, in
comparison with what may be derived from the "Canterbury
Tales." We are presented with the very form and pressure of
the age. . . We are admitted behind the scenes; we inspect
the interior of society. We see causes beginning to operate of
which we now enjoy the effects. We see the clergy meeting
with the contempt and sneers of wise observers. . . We see
the rising influence of the people. . . Then in addition to
all this we have fancy and imagination shedding their radiance
over all, romance so like truth, poetry so full of nature.
Would not a writer of such powers, and such a character, but
for the unfortunate drawback to which we have alluded, and
which the failure of every attempt has rendered us almost
hopeless of ever seeing removed, be likely to find favour in the
eyes of a generation who pay such homage to the mirrored life
of Shakespeare, and who take such delight in "the pictured
page" of Scott?
[This passage was quoted in extenso by a reviewer in the Gentleman's Magazine,
March, 1858, new ser., vol. xxxix, pp. 286-7, and commended as "a little over¬
wrought, but in the main just."]
1852. Mitford, Mary Russell. Recollections of a Literary Life, 3 vols.;
vol. i, p. 111; vol. ii, pp. 176, 236; vol. iii, pp. 189-91, 194.
[iii. 190] These towers [Donnington] with their battlements, and the
deep, arched entrance . . . speak of little but war in its
sternest form; but the little hall, with its beautiful groined
roof, and a certain mixture of rude splendour and homely
comfort, . . . tells of the genial poet whose healthy, cordial,
[p. 191] hearty spirit must have made him the delight of every board,
and most especially of his own.
I was much tempted to extract some passage in harmony
