
22 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1855
[c. 1855.] Hunt, James Henry Leigh. An Essay on the Sonnet, [in]
The Book of the Sonnet, ed. Leigh Hunt and S. Adams Lee,
Boston, 1867, vol. i, pp. 65-6.
[For the date, which should be two years later, see below, App. A, [c. 1857].
[p. 65] How are we to account for the non-appearance of a Sonnet
in the poems of Chaucer?—of Chaucer, who was so fond of
Italian poetry, such a servant of love, such a haunter of the
green corners of revery, particularly if they were "small,"—
of Chaucer, moreover, who was so especially acquainted with
the writings of Petrarca’s predecessor, Dante, with those of
his friend Boccaccio, and who, besides eulogizing the genius
of Petrarca himself, is supposed to have made his personal
acquaintance at Padua? Out of the four great English poets,
Chaucer is the only one who has left us a sonnet of no kind
[p. 66] whatsoever, though he was qualified for every kind, and
though of none of the four poets it would seem more naturally
to have fallen in the way.
[Three reasons for this are suggested: (1) Chaucer's close
connection with France led him to French miscellaneous
poetry rather than Italian, (2) the sonnets of Dante and
Petrarch were not yet known in England, (3) Chaucer's own
propensity to narrative in poetry.] The second of these
reasons, however, I take to have been the chief. Had Chaucer
been familiar with the Sonnets of men whom he so admired,
the very lovingness of his nature would hardly have failed to
make him echo their tones!
1855. Hunt, James Henry Leigh. [Preface to] Death and the Ruffians
modernized from Chaucer, [in] Stories in Verse, pp. 262-3.
[This modernization of the Pardoners Tale first appeared,
without a preface, in 1845, q.v. It is followed in Stories in
Verse by Cambus Khan, Hunt's second version of part of
the Squiers Tale, which first appeared in Horne’s Chaucer
Modernized, 1841. q.v.]
[p. 262] The reader will do me great injustice, if he thinks that
modernizations like these are intended as substitutes for
what they modernize. Their only plea for indulgence is, that
they may act as incitements towards acquaintance with the
great original. Chaucer's stories are all complete of their
kind, all interesting in their plots, and surprising in their
terminations; and the satirical stories are as full of amuse¬
