
114 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1873
losing part of his own; yet long dwelling on the sadness of
forsaken love, seeking the "consolation of philosophy,"
watching the stars, praying to the “Mother of God"; studying
books, and, more still, woman's nature; his eye open to all
the beauties of the world around him, his ear to the "heavenly
harmony" of birds' song; at length becoming the most
gracious and tender spirit, the sweetest singer, the best
pourtrayer, the most pathetic, and withal the most genial
and humourful healthy-souled man that England had ever
seen. Still, after 500 years, he is bright and fresh as the
glad light green of the May he so much loved; he is still
second only to Shakespeare in England, and fourth only to
him and Dante and Homer in the world. When will our
Victorian time love and honour him as it should? Surely, of
all our poets he is the one to come home to us most.
[p. 389]
[pp. 389
[Contrast between Chaucer and Tennyson.]
-90]
[The change in Chaucer marked by the development of
[pp. 390
humour.]
-3]
[The work of the Chaucer Society; the Six-text Edition; a
comparison of the MSS. made the Tales fall into their proper
places in the pilgrimage, and prepared the way for a real
edition. The Society’s other texts and studies. An appeal
for support.]
[Dr. Furnivall’s copy of his article with important additions
and alterations, is in the possession of the editor. One of
Dr. Furnivall’s additions reads thus:]
One may fairly claim then, for the Chaucer Society the
credit of having, with Mr. Bradshaw’s and Prof. ten Brink's
help, done the best work at and for Chaucer that has been
done since his death. It has explained the secret of his early
life, cleared his memory from the reproach of having written
many unworthinesses, and of having muddled his greatest
work; it has laid the sure founda tions for a fitting edition of
one of the greatest poets of mankind, and has made plainer to
modern English ears the music, to modern English eyes the
sunny soul, that cheered our ancestors in Wicliffe's day.
1873, etc. Furnivall, Frederick James, and others. Notices of Chaucer
Discoveries, Notes, Correspondence, etc., [in] The Athenæum [and]
The Academy.
[In 1873 Dr. Furnivall contributed a series of notices of
recent Chaucerian discoveries to the Athenæum, and later he
