
1871] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 111
she has glad eyes. ... Sometimes he describes amply by the
merest hint, as where the Friar, before setting himself softly
down, drives away the cat. We know without need of more
words that he has chosen the snuggest corner.
[p. 360] Chaucer seems to me to have been one of the most purely
[p. 361] original of poets, as much so in respect of the world that is
about us as Dante in respect of that which is within us.
There had been nothing like him before, there has been
nothing since. He is original, not in the sense that he thinks
and says what nobody ever thought and said before, and what
nobody can ever think and say again, but because he is always
natural; because, if not always absolutely new, he is always
delightfully fresh, because he sets before us the world as it
honestly appeared to Geoffrey Chaucer, and not a world as it
seemed proper to certain people that it ought to appear.
[p. 365] In spite of some external stains, which those who have
studied the influence of manners will easily account for
without imputing them to any moral depravity, we feel that
we can join the pure-minded Spenser in calling him 'most
sacred, happy spirit.' If character may be divined from
works, he was a good man, genial, sincere, hearty, temperate
of mind, more wise, perhaps, for this world than the next, but
thoroughly humane, and friendly with God and men. I know
not how to sum up what we feel about him better than by
saying (what would have pleased most one who was indifferent
to fame) that we love him more even than we admire.
1871. Brooke, Stopford Augustus. The Descriptive Poetry of Chaucer,
[in] Macmillan’s Magazine, Aug. 1871, vol. xxiv, pp. 268-79.
[p. 269] The landscape of Chaucer is sometimes taken from the
Italian and sometimes from the French landscape. It possesses
almost always the same elements, differently mixed up in
different poems: a May morning—the greenwood, or a
garden—some clear running water—meadows covered with
flowers—some delectable place or other with an arbour laid
down with soft and fresh-cut turf. There is no sky, except in
such rapid allusions as this, "Bright was the day and blue the
firmament;" no cloud studies; no conception of the beauty of
wild nature.
His range, therefore, is extremely limited; but within the
