
1869] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 97
My Master, GEOFFREY CHAUCER, thou do meet,
Then shalt thou win a space of rest full sweet;
[p. 440] Then be thou bold, and speak the words I say,
The idle singer of an empty day!
"O Master, O thou great of heart and tongue,
Thou well mayst ask me why I wander here
In raiment rent of stories oft besung!
But of thy gentleness draw thou anear,
And then the heart of one that held thee dear
Mayst thou behold!" ...
[p. 441] O Master, if thine heart could love us yet,
Spite of things left undone, and wrongly done,
Some place in loving hearts then should we get,
For thou, sweet-souled, didst never stand alone,
But knew’st the joy and woe of many an one—
—By lovers dead, who live through thee, we pray,
Help thou us singers of an empty day!
Fearest thou, Book, what answer thou mayst gain
Lest he should scorn thee, and thereof thou die?
Nay, it shall not be.—Thou mayst toil in vain
And never draw the House of Fame anigh;
Yet he and his shall know whereof we cry,
Shall call it not ill-done to strive to lay
The ghosts that crowd about life’s empty day.
1868. Swinburne, A. C. William Blake. See above, 1866.
1868. Waller, John Green. [A Painted Window, designed by J. G.
Waller, with medallions of Chaucer and Gower, and with scenes
from Chaucer’s life and poems, placed over Chaucer's tomb in
Westminster Abbey as the gift of Dr. Rogers.]
1869. Browne, Matthew. [pseud., i.e. Rands, William Brighty.]
Chaucer's England, 2 vols.
[Chapters on "The Poet of the Canterbury Tales," and "The
Story and the Pilgrims," followed by others on various aspects of
mediæval life. Diffuse and inaccurate but not without merit.]
1869-89. Ellis, Alexander James. On Early English Pronunciation,
with especial reference to Shakspere and Chaucer. Including a
rearrangement of Prof. F. J. Child’s memoirs on the language of
Chaucer and Gower [q.v. above, 1862], Parts i and ii, London,
Chaucer Society and E.E.T. Soc., 1869; Part iii, 1871; Part iv,
1875; Part v, 1889.
[The parts directly concerning Chaucer’s language are:
CHAUCER CRITICISM.–III.
