
1862] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 61
"What a difference," said I to my wife, after we had
departed, "between a Welshman and an Englishman of the
lower class. What would a Suffolk miller's swain have said
if I had repeated to him verses out of Beowulf or even Chaucer,
and had asked him about the residence of Skelton?"
1862. Burne-Jones, Sir Edward Coley. Designs to illustrate "The
Legend of Good Women."
[Some of these were executed in glass in 1864 by Morris, and
are at Peterhouse, Cambridge, as also is a portrait of Chaucer,
designed by Burne-Jones in 1874. See M. Bell, Sir E. Burne-
Jones, 1899, p. 32.]
1862. Child, Francis James. Observations on the Language of Chaucer
[in the] Memoirs of the American Academy, new ser., vol. viii,
1863, pp. 445-502. [Rearranged and reprinted by A. J. Ellis in
Early English Pronunciation, 1869-75, q.v., below.]
[This is the first minute and scholarly analysis of Chaucer's
language, and it marks an epoch in the study of the poet, for
it made possible the full solution of the question of the right
scansion of the Canterbury Tales. It consists of classified
lists of Chaucer’s vocabulary and grammatical forms, and is
preceded by an introductory note:]
[pp. 445- [Wright’s edn. of the Canterbury Tales employed, as being
6]
based on a single good MS. and fairly accurate. The prevalent
ignorance of the English language of that period.]
[p. 446] We are a long way off from a knowledge of the English of
the fourteenth century, and still further from a satisfactory
edition of Chaucer.
Indeed, there is reason to doubt (and the editors may find
some comfort in the thought) whether there ever was an
accurate copy of a poem by Chaucer, except his own, or a
manuscript corrected by his hand. Certainly this would not
be an absolutely extravagant inference from what he says
"unto his own Scrivener."
Adam Scrivener was only the first in a long line of cor¬
rupters ... Adam may have been heedless and stupid, but
... he might justly plead the unsettled state of the language
in part excuse. It was undoubtedly very hard for an humble
scribe to remember and observe all the nice differences between
[p. 447] the courtly style of his patron and the vulgar dialect ... Chaucer
thought the prospect of his verses being preserved as he wrote
