
100 [Baynes.] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1870
at systematic critical revision. The 'Canterbury Tales'
have, indeed, fared somewhat better, having been more than
once carefully edited by critics in many respects well qualified
for the task. But much still remains to be done for the text
of Chaucer’s greatest work; and still more, perhaps, for the
adequate explanation of its language and allusions. We
have as yet no satisfactory and authoritative text even of
the 'Canterbury Tales'; and the best published text, that
recently revised by Mr. Morris, to which we shall presently
refer in detail, is without note or comment of any kind.
The work which Johnson projected, and which a succession
of eminent scholars and critics have so earnestly desiderated,
still remains, therefore, to be done.
In these circumstances the formation of a Chaucer Society,
mainly for the purpose of printing the best existing manu¬
scripts of the poet’s works, ought to be matter of hearty con¬
gratulation to all lovers of English literature. Our public
and private libraries are rich in Chaucer manuscripts, and
the best of these must be available for critical use before an
authoritative, complete and satisfactory text of Chaucer can
be produced. But the only way of placing these manu¬
scripts within the reach of English scholars is by printing
them; and, if done at all, this must obviously be the work
of a special Society. With this end in view, the Chaucer
Society was accordingly founded two years ago.
[Account of the Chaucer Society’s aims and publications.
[p.7] Value of the latter to students. Only seventy subscribers
in England, and thirty in the United States. Readers
recommended to subscribe.]
[p. 8] From what we have said it will be seen that the publi¬
cations of the Chaucer Society are preparing the way for a
complete edition of Chaucer’s works in the twofold direction
of text and commentary. The requirements of such an
edition are an authoritative text based on a comparison of
the best manuscripts, and an adequate explanation in the
shape of notes and commentary of Chaucer’s learning and
literary studies, his allusions, language and versification.
The first point is the text; and, in order to estimate fairly
the work the Chaucer Society is doing in this respect, it is
necessary to glance at the history of the printed texts down
