
1870] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 107
respects best qualified for the work, has confined his labours
in this direction to a revision of previous glossaries. ...
[p. 40] This [comparison with Piers Plowman] points to an import¬
[An examination of Morris’s Glossary follows.]
ant means of interpreting Chaucer’s language which has not
as yet been turned to anything like adequate account. We
refer to the critical examination of the writings of his con¬
temporaries and immediate successors. The more carefully
the early literature of the fourteenth century is studied, the
more clearly will it appear that Chaucer’s additions to the
vocabulary of the language are far less numerous than is
commonly supposed. He has been charged with adulterating
the English speech of his time by the wholesale importation
of foreign, and especially of Norman-French, words. In his
early translations and paraphrases from Norman-French he
occasionally, it is true, transfers words mainly for the con¬
venience of their rhymes. But with these exceptions his
importations are comparatively few. His real superiority
lies in the admirable taste and judgment displayed in the
[p. 41] selection of his vocabulary, the natural reflex of his keen and
exquisite sensibility to the latent significance of language.
The perfection of his art lies in his subtle insight into the
deeper meaning of words, and his power of combining them
in the most felicitous manner. He is not fond of verbal
novelties for their own sake, and his obscurities of phrase
and diction may generally therefore be explained by a
reference to the literature of the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries. The works of Gower and Lidgate, especially the
latter, are of essential service in this respect.
1870. Brae, Andrew Edmund. The Treatise of the Astrolabe of Geoffrey
Chaucer, edited by A. E. Brae, with notes and illustrations.
[The volume contains seven illustrations of Chaucer's Astro¬
labe, with a text of his treatise, an Appendix reprinting
essays on the astronomy of the Canterbury Tales; and a
series of notes on Chaucer’s astronomy.]
1870. Courthope, William John. The Paradise of Birds, pp. 9, 122-3.
[Man has exterminated all the feathered tribes, and the
insect is becoming the lord of creation. Maresnest, the
scientific theorist, and Windbag, the romantic poet, come to
