
104 [Baynes.] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1870
factory text of Chaucer, we must give up the printed editions,
and fall back upon the manuscripts; and that instead of
bundling them altogether, we must pick out one best manu¬
script which also is one of those nearest to Chaucer's time.
The latter circumstance is absolutely necessary, if we would
reproduce the language and versification of the author. At
the same time it cannot but be acknowledged that the earliest
manuscript might possibly be very incorrect and incomplete,
from the ignorance or negligence of the scribe who copied
it. This, however, is not the case with regard to Chaucer's
[p. 14] "Canterbury Tales." The Harleian manuscript, No. 7334,
is by far the best manuscript of Chaucer's "Canterbury
Tales" that I have yet examined, in regard both to antiquity
and correctness. The handwriting is one which would at
first sight be taken by an experienced scholar for that of the
latter part of the fourteenth century, and it must have been
written within a few years after 1400, and therefore soon
after Chaucer’s death and the publication of the "Canterbury
Tales." Its language has very little, if any, appearance of
local dialect; and the text is in general extremely good, the
variations from Tyrwhitt being usually for the better.'
This reasoning seems, as we have said, sufficiently conclu¬
sive, and it has very naturally determined the course of sub¬
sequent editors, both Mr. Bell and Mr. Morris having followed
Mr. Wright’s plan, and adopted the text he had selected.
But the publication of the Chaucer Society six-text edition
of the 'Prologue' and 'Knight’s Tale' has very much
destroyed the force of Mr. Wright’s plea in favour of adhering
strictly to a single text. A comparison of the Harleian
text with the six now publishing by the Society, will show
that there are numberless points of grammar, metre, or sense
in which it may be improved by careful collation, and that
the old plan must still be followed before we can hope to
secure a satisfactory and authoritative text. ...
[p 15] The latest text of Chaucer’s poetical works, that edited by
Mr. Morris, and substituted for Tyrwhitt’s in the new issue of
the Aldine Series, is undoubtedly also the best. Mr. Morris
is one of our most accurate and accomplished early English
scholars, and no better editor of a mediæval text could possibly
be found. After examining several manuscripts of the
