
110 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1870-
and gave to the rhymed pentameter, which he made our
heroic measure, something of the architectural repose of
blank verse. He found our language lumpish, stiff, unwilling,
too apt to speak Saxonly in grouty monosyllables; he left it
enriched with the longer measure of the Italian and Provençal
[p. 353] [Chaucer is a great narrative poet.] The power of diffusion
poets.
without being diffuse would seem to be the highest merit of
narration, giving it that easy flow which is so delightful.
Chaucer’s descriptive style is remarkable for its lowness of
tone—for that combination of energy with simplicity which
is among the rarest gifts in literature. ...
Not that Chaucer cannot be intense, too, on occasion; but
it is with a quiet intensity of his own, that comes in as it
were by accident. ...
Pandarus, looking at Troïlus,
'Took up a light and found his countenance
As for to look upon an old romance.'
With Chaucer it is always the thing itself and not the
description of it that is the main object. His picturesque bits
are incidental to the story, glimpsed in passing; they never
stop the way. His key is so low that his high lights are never
obtrusive.
[p. 356] Chaucer never shows any signs of effort, and it is a main
proof of his excellence that he can be so inadequately sampled
by detached passages—by single lines taken away from the
connection in which they contribute to the general effect.
He has that continuity of thought, that evenly prolonged
power, and that delightful equanimity, which characterize
the higher orders of mind. There is something in him of the
disinterestedness that made the Greeks masters in art. His
[p. 357] phrase is never importunate. His simplicity is that of
elegance, not of poverty. The quiet unconcern with which he
says his best things is peculiar to him among English poets,
though Goldsmith, Addison, and Thackeray have approached
it in prose.
When Chaucer describes anything, it is commonly by one
of those simple and obvious epithets or qualities that are so
easy to miss. Is it a woman? He tells us she is fresh, that
