
78 Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1865
strong denunciation of the reviewer by Furnivall in The
[A review of Kingsley in the Saturday Review led to a
Reader, Feb. 3, 1866, q.v. below. The second edition, 1875,
edited by F. J. Furnivall, with a new preface by Kings¬
ley, and hindwords by Furnivall, contains other Chaucer
references.]
1865. Laing, David. The Poems and Fables of Robert Henryson, ed.
David Laing, pp. xix, xxi-ii, xxv-ix [The Testament of Cresseid
and Chaucer's Troilus. Also numerous references to Chaucer,
chiefly quotations from Chalmers, in the notes.]
1865. Maurice, Frederick Denison. On Books, [a lecture delivered
Nov. 1865, printed in] The Friendship of Books and other
Lectures, 1874, pp. 76-7.
[pp. 76- Chaucer was possibly the friend of Wycliffe—certainly
7]
shared many of his sympathies and antipathies. He loved
the priest, or, as he was called, the secular priest, who went
among the people, and cared for them as his fellow-country-
men; he intensely disliked the friars, who flattered them and
cursed them, and in both ways governed them and degraded
them. His education had been different from Wycliffe's, his
early poetical powers had been called forth by the ladies and
gentlemen of the court. He mingled much French with his
speech, as they did; he acquired from them a kind of
acquaintance with life which Wycliffe could not obtain in
the Oxford schools. Had he remained under their influence
he might have been merely a very musical court singer; but
he entered into fellowship with common citizens. He became
a keen observer of all the different forms of life and society
in his time—a keen observer, and, as all such are, genial,
friendly, humorous, able to understand men about him by
sympathising with them, able to understand the stories of the
past by his experience of the present. Without being a
reformer like Wycliffe, he helped forward the Reformation
by making men acquainted with themselves and their fellows,
by stripping off disguises, and by teaching them to open
their eyes to the beautiful world which lay about them.
Chaucer is the genuine specimen of an English poet—a type
of the best who were to come after him; with cordial affection
for men and for nature; often tempted to coarseness, often
yielding to his baser nature in his desire to enter into all the
