
1870] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Baynes.] 101
to the present time. Caxton printed the 'Canterbury
Tales' twice, the first time from a very corrupt manuscript,
and the second time from a much better one. 'Troilus and
Cressid,' 'The House of Fame,' 'The Assembly of Fowls,'
and some minor pieces, were printed by Caxton’s coadjutors
and successors, Wynken de Worde and Pynson. The first
edition of Chaucer’s poetical works was that published in
1532, and edited by W. Thynne. In his curious dedication
to Henry VIII, Thynne claims to have corrected, by com¬
parison with the manuscripts, those parts of the poet’s works
already printed, and to have published the rest for the first
time. [Thynne quoted; see above, 1532, vol. i, p. 79].
As may be surmised from this extract, Chaucer did not
benefit much from Thynne’s supervision, his text of the
'Canterbury Tales' being in some respects inferior to that
of Caxton’s second reprint, while the minor poems are
crowded with verbal corruptions. Stowe, the next editor,
added little to Thynne’s work, except some miscellaneous
poems, 'now imprinted for the first time,' which fill twenty
pages of his massive folio. These poems are of doubtful
authority, being more in Lidgate’s manner than Chaucer's;
but the longest of them, 'The Court of Love,' has kept its
place in the subsequent editions of the poet’s works. The
third chief edition published during the sixteenth century is
[p. 9] that edited by Speight, and in many respects he may fairly
be regarded as the first editor, strictly so called, of Chaucer.
Thynne and Stowe paid but little attention to the text;
and neither of them attempted anything in the way of
illustration or commentary. Speight attended in a manner
to both these departments of an editor’s duty; and, though
his alterations in the text are comparatively few and unim¬
portant, they are still in the main improvements. But his
claims as an editor rest mainly on his explanations of
Chaucer’s language. He is the first that attempted any
detailed explanation of archaic words and phrases; and his
glossary, with all its imperfections, entitles him to the grateful
remembrance of Chaucer students. ... Speight’s compact
folio, first published in 1598, again in 1602, with some im¬
provements, and a third time in 1687, with a few trifling
additions, continued to be the standard edition of Chaucer
