
1855] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 25
Lincoln. But the strong Teutonic good sense of Chaucer had
[p. 248] looked more deeply into the whole monastic and sacerdotal
system. His wisdom betrays itself in his most mirthful, as in
his coarsest humour. He who drew the Monk, the Pardoner,
the Friar Limitour, the Summoner, had seen far more than the
outer form, the worldliness of the Churchmen, the abuse of
indulgences, the extortions of the friars, the licentiousness of
the Ecclesiastical Courts, of the Ecclesiastics themselves; he
had penetrated into the inner depths of the religion. Yet his
wisdom, even in his most biting passages, is tempered with
charity. Though every order, the Abbot, the Prioress, the
Friar, the Pardoner, the Summoner, are impersonated to the
life, with all their weaknesses, follies, affectations, even vices
and falsehoods, in unsparing freedom, in fearless truth, yet none
or hardly one, is absolutely odious. ... The Summoner, whose
[p. 249] office and the Archdeacon's Court in which he officiated seem to
have been most unpopular, is drawn in the darkest colours, with
his fire-red cherubim’s face, lecherous, venal, licentious. Above
all, the Parish Priest of Chaucer has thrown off Roman mediæval
sacerdotalism; he feels his proper place; he arrays himself
only in the virtues which are the essence of his holy function.
This unrivalled picture is the most powerful because the most
quiet, uninsulting, unexasperating satire. Chaucer's Parish
Priest might have been drawn from Wycliffe ... not at
Oxford ... but the affectionate and beloved teacher of his
humble flock. ... [The rest of the Chaucerian passage refers
to incidents and subjects connected with Chaucer only by the
acceptance of the Testament of Love as his.]
1855. Morris, William, and Burne-Jones, Sir Edward Coley. Reading
of Chaucer at Oxford [recorded in] The Life of William Morris, by
J. W. Mackail, 2 vols, 1901, vol. i, p. 61.
["During this year (1855) he (Morris) and Burne-Jones read
through Chaucer. He found, in the poet whom he afterwards
took for his special master, not merely the wider and sweeter
view of life which was needed to correct the harsh or mystical
elements of his own mediævalism, but the conquest of English
verse as a medium boundless in its range and perfect in its
flexibility." Of Morris in 1854, Mr. Mackail says (ib. p. 39),
"The two books, which afterwards stood with him high and
apart beyond all others, Chaucer and Malory, were as yet
