
1870] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 99
[p. 3] These excellences have justly made Chaucer not only the
father of English poetry, the greatest of our dramatists before
the rise of the regular drama, but one of the most delightful
and habitually read of all English poets. The many eulo¬
gistic references to him by later writers both in prose and
verse, down to the close of the Elizabethan period, show how
constantly he was studied during the two centuries after his
death.
[Lydgate, Occleve, Douglas, Wilson, Puttenham, Ascham,
Fox, Camden, Sidney, Spenser, Milton, among his admirers.]
Dryden, again, did his utmost to popularise the more
striking of the 'Canterbury Tales,' and has left, perhaps,
the best critical estimate of their author we possess. During
the eighteenth century there were several elaborate attempts
to make English readers better acquainted with Chaucer,
whose language had by that time become too archaic for
the effortless enjoyment of ordinary readers. And in our
own day, notwithstanding the obstacles interposed by a
grammar and vocabulary partially obsolete, Chaucer has
reappeared in a greater number of forms, and is, perhaps,
more generally read and studied, than any of the great
Elizabethan poets except Shakspeare.
These circumstances render it the more surprising, and,
we may add, the more discreditable to our national scholar¬
ship, that no complete critical edition of Chaucer's poetical
works should yet have been produced. The reproach is one
of old standing, and many suggestions have from time to
time been made with the view of wiping it away.
[Quotation of Dr. Johnson’s note on his projected edition.
A correct edition called for by Godwin and Todd.]
[p. 5] The truth is, that until the last few years the greater part
of Chaucer’s poetical works have never, strictly speaking,
been edited at all. 'Troilus and Cressid,' a story nearly as
long as the 'Æneid,' the 'Romaunt of the Rose,' the 'House
of Fame,' the 'Legend of Good Women,' and the minor
poems, collected and published together for the first time
by Thynne in 1532, were printed from defective and im¬
perfect manuscripts without any critical oversight or correc¬
tion; and from that time to our own day they have been
reprinted from the black-letter folios without any attempt
