
1870] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. [Baynes.] 103
edition of the 'Canterbury Tales' is so well known that it
is needless to specify its merits and defects in detail. In
our judgment, the merits of the work far outweigh its defects,
although in the present state of our knowledge the text
must no doubt be regarded as seriously defective. Still on
the whole Tyrwhitt has done more for Chaucer than any
other single editor. It is no doubt true that he was un¬
acquainted with the niceties of Chaucer’s grammar, and their
intimate connexion with the mechanism of his verse; and
[p. 13] Mr. Wright, in the introduction to his edition of the 'Canter¬
bury Tales,' has emphasized these deficiencies in somewhat
sweeping terms. But Tyrwhitt was a sagacious critic, pos¬
sessing great literary knowledge, taste, and industry; and
he brought all his powers and acquirements to the illustration
of his favourite author, often with the happiest results. ...
The next step in the history of Chaucer texts is the publi¬
cation of this manuscript—the Harleian—by Mr. Wright in
1847. This publication represents something like a revolution
in the plan of editing Chaucer, and at once raises the whole
question as to the best method of dealing with the text. At
first sight Mr. Wright seems to make out a strong case for his
own plan. After noticing that the grammatical forms of the
fourteenth century underwent a considerable change about the
middle of the fifteenth, and that copyists of this date usually
employed the language of the time rather than of the author
they are copying, he contends that the only satisfactory plan
of editing Chaucer is to select the oldest and best manuscript,
and to adhere to it faithfully throughout. The opposite plan,
which had hitherto been usually followed, he condemns
indeed in no very measured terms :—
'It is evident, therefore,' he says, 'that the plan of forming
the text of any work of the periods of which we are speaking
from a number of different manuscripts, written at different
times and different places, is the most absurd plan which it
is possible to conceive. Yet this was the method professedly
followed by Tyrwhitt in forming a text of the "Canterbury
Tales" of Chaucer.'
And after pointing out Tyrwhitt’s special disqualifications
as a student of manuscripts, he adds :—
'Under these circumstances it is clear that to form a satis¬
