
1866] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 81
[p. 84] I should like truly to know what Chaucer means
by his sand-hill. ... Sometimes I would fain have it to
mean the ghostly sand of the horologe of the world. ...
Sometimes I like to think that she is seated on the sand
because she is herself the Spirit of Staying, and victor over
all things that pass and change. ... And sometimes I
think, though I do not like to think (neither did Chaucer
mean this, for he always meant the lovely thing first, not
the low one), that she is seated on her sand-heap as the
only treasure to be gained by human toil. ...
But of course it does not in the least matter what it
means. All that matters specially to us in Chaucer's vision,
is that, next to Patience (as the reader will find by looking
at the context in the Assembly of Foules), were "Beheste"
and "Art";—Promise, that is, and Art: and that although
these visionary powers are here waiting only in one of the
outer courts of Love, and the intended patience is here only
the long-suffering of love; and the intended beheste, its
promise; and the intended art, its cunning,—the same powers
companion each other necessarily in the courts and ante¬
chambers of every triumphal home of man.
1866. The Poetical Works of Geoffrey Chaucer. Aldine edition,
ed. R. Morris, 6 vols.
[With Sir N. H. Nicolas' Life, and Tyrwhitt's Essay and
Discourse, and a glossary. To the Essay are appended some
sections on Chaucer's metres by W. W. Skeat. The Court of
Love and the Cuckow and the Nightingale, Chaucer's Dream
(The Isle of Ladies) and the Flour and the Lefe are included
in the text.]
[Preface, In this edition of Chaucer's poetical works Tyrwhitt's text
p. v]
has been replaced by one based upon manuscripts ...
No better manuscript of the Canterbury Tales could be
found than the Harleian manuscript, 7334, which is far more
uniform and accurate than any other I have examined; it has,
therefore, been selected and faithfully adhered to throughout
[pp. vi- as the text of the present edition. [MS. Lansdowne 851 and
viii]
the MSS. employed by Tyrwhitt also used to check MS.
Harl. Examples of successful emendations introduced, and of
the final e. A list of the poems included and of the MSS.
used.]
CHAUCER CRITICISM.—III.
