
1854] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 17
[p. 416] Whatever the general and popular estimation of his writings
may be, he will be read so long as a love for nature and truth
shall remain among those who speak the English language.
He was worthy to lead off that noble band of British bards,
who will long reflect glory on the English name. It is a
conspicuous place which he holds among his compeers in
that 'House of Fame', which he has so graphically described
to us.
1854. Clough, Arthur Hugh. Letter to F. J. Child, [dated] Sept. 2,
1854. [printed in] Prose Remains of A. H. Clough, 1888, p. 228-9.
I hope the Chaucer is going on prosperously. I think you
should adopt means to make the metre quite obvious, at any
sacrifice of typographical prettiness. Yet I don't like the
grave accent, 'When Zephyrus eke with his sotè breth,' and
should almost prefer the ĕ, sotĕ, but that it seems unmeaning
to use a mark of quantity. Yet it is not a case of accent,
either. I think I should in one way or another mark every
syllable that would not now be pronounced, grevĕs and levès
and Emperourè’s daughter—the most correct mark would be
ë: Emperourë’s; sotë. And I should prefix to the whole a
very plain and short statement of the usage in these points.
I suppose there is not much doubt about a few general rules,
though Chaucer did not regularly observe them, as, for ex¬
ample, the use of the ĕ in adjectives after definite articles,
which it seems to me he omits occasionally, with French
adjectives, as if it was a matter of ear rather than rule. So
also with such Saxon dissyllables, as tymĕ, which is not in¬
variably a dissyllable, I think. And yet it would be worth
while giving a list of such words as are liable to be dissyllables.
However, ere this, I daresay you have settled all these pre¬
liminaries. I don’t quite see what you should do about the
Miller's and the Reve's Tales. I think explanation might be
[p. 229] a little retrenched there, so as to leave them in the "decent
obscurity of a learned language.
[For another letter by Clough on the same subject see above, 1853.]
1854. Lowell, James Russell. Leaves from my Journal in Italy and
Elsewhere, [in] Graham’s Monthly, April-June, 1854 [not in B M.
See Bibliography of J. R. Lowell by G. W. Cooke]. (Writings,
Riverside Edn., ll vols., vol. i, p. 184.)
I cannot describe our drive [from Subiaco to Tivoli] ...
CHAUCER CRITICISM.–III.
