
1870] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 109
poet, without knowing it, who did not waste time in consider¬
ing whether his age were good or bad, but quietly taking it for
granted as the best that ever was or ever could be for him,
has left us such a picture of contemporary life as no man ever
painted. †A perpetual fountain of good sense,' Dryden calls
him, yes, and of good humor, too, and wholesome thought.†
[p. 300] It is not the finding of a thing, but the making something
out of it after it is found, that is of consequence. Accord¬
ingly, Chaucer, like Shakespeare, invented almost nothing.
[p. 322] †Chaucer ... drew from the South a certain airiness of
sentiment and expression, a felicity of phrase, and an elegance
of turn hitherto unprecedented and hardly yet matched in
our literature, but all the while kept firm hold of his native
soundness of understanding, and that genial humour which
seems to be the proper element of worldly wisdom. With
[p. 323] Dante, life represented the passage of the soul from a state
of nature to a state of grace; ... With Chaucer, life is a
pilgrimage, but only that his eye may be delighted with the
varieties of costume and character. There are good morals
to be found in Chaucer, but they are always incidental.
With Dante the main question is the saving of the soul, with
Chaucer it is the conduct of life.†
[p. 324-5] Chaucer is the first who broke away from the dreary
traditional style, and gave not merely stories, but lively
pictures of real life as the ever-renewed substance of poetry.
He was a reformer, too, not only in literature, but in morals.
But as in the former his exquisite tact saved him from all
eccentricity, so in the latter the pervading sweetness of his
nature could never be betrayed into harshness and invective.
... There is no touch of cynicism in all he wrote.
Dante's brush seems sometimes to have been smeared with
the burning pitch of his own fiery lake. Chaucer's pencil is
dipped in the cheerful colour-box of the old illuminators, and
he has their patient delicacy of touch, with a freedom far
beyond their somewhat mechanic brilliancy.
[p. 336] One of the world’s three or four great story tellers, he was
also one of the best versifiers that ever made English trip and
sing with a gayety that seems careless, but where every foot
beats time to the tune of the thought. By the skilful arrange¬
ment of his pauses he evaded the monotony of the couplet,
