
1874] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 117
and Chryseis. ... Chaucer has invented an entirely new series
of preliminaries; far more elaborate, and such as almost
to leave his Cryseyde in the position of a modest and chaste¬
minded woman, even after the amour is in full career. ...
The English poet neither schemes nor affects (if I do not
misapprehend) to invent an essentially different character:
but he leads up to the crisis by a more artful and more
sympathetic course of incident. ...
[A study of the two Pandaruses, the sources, etc., follows.]
1873. Unknown. The Cycle of English Song, II. [in] Temple Bar,
vol. xxxviii, June-July, pp. 308-324, 458, 460-1.
[p. 311] He talked, a child, to children—the biggest, oldest, wisest,
cleverest child of the company—and so he amused them
[p. 312] incessantly. ... In a sense, ordinary persons now alive
may be said to have overtaken him, just as extraordinary
persons have far outstripped him. In the early dawn of English
poetry it required a man of the highest genius to feel what
nearly everybody now feels, and to put the feeling into words
which have almost passed into commonplace, and which would
indeed have done so but for the musical and cunning fashion
in which they are arranged. ... In a word, it is the childhood
[p. 313] of poetry. ... Nor is it nature only that he treats in this
childish, simple, superficial, non-artificial way. Men and
women, and all that men and women do, say, eat, drink, and
wear, he views and describes in the same plain, matter-of-fact,
exact, truthful fashion. ... Who are they? Where do they
come from? What are their names? ... [Chaucer's prolixity
[p. 315] typical of childhood.] Neither must it be supposed, in
anticipation of the criticism of later times ... that he is
so long-winded ... from the very depth and subtlety of his
art, and from a conviction that this is the only way of making
people see the things you want them to see. For it is not
the only way, nor yet the best way. Indeed, it is the worst
and lowest way of all the ways that do achieve the object. It
is the earliest way, the childish way; and Chaucer employed
it because he knew no other.
1874. Green, John Richard. A Short History of the English People,
pp. 163-4, 212-6, 229, 231, 248-9, 287-90.
[p. 214] If with the best modern critics we reject from the list
