
1867] Chaucer Criticism and Allusion. 87
1867. The Clerk's Tale, edited by W. Aldis Wright, from MS. D. 4.
24. in the University Library, Cambridge. Privately printed,
Cambridge.
1867-71. Bradshaw, Henry. The Skeleton of Chaucer's Canterbury
Tales: an attempt to distinguich the several fragments of the work as
left by the author (Memoranda, no. iv), preface dated 1867, title page
1868, and postscript 1871. (Collected Papers, 1889, pp. 102-48.)
[This is the only printed result of Bradshaw's Chaucer
work, which was largely the cause of the foundation of the
Chaucer Society. For the editions of the Works projected by
him see above, 1864, Works. In 1865 "An attempt to
ascertain the state of Chaucer's works as they were left at his
death, with some notices of their subsequent history" was
advertised as shortly to be published (q. v. above, 1865); of
this the introductory pages alone were found among his papers
(see G. W. Prothero, A Memoir of Henry Bradshaw, 1888,
p. 347). This memorandum was, it seems, printed as a tenta¬
tive preparation for the larger work. But in the postscript of
1871 Bradshaw bids farewell to Chaucer work, the Library
claiming his time.
He divides the Canterbury Tales into twelve fragments, and
prints the beginnings and ends of these and of his subdivisions
of them. The MSS. are classified by their arrangement of the
Tales, which corresponds with their classification by textual
value. Not only mentions of time and place occurring in the
'links' are used, but orthographical and rhyme tests. Gamelyn
is retained, in Frag. 1.]
1867. Collier, John Payne. General Introduction [to] Seven English
Poetical Miscellanies, 7 vols., vol. i [Tottell], pp. i-iii.
[Godfray’s 1532 edn. of Chaucer's Works really the first
English miscellany. The Testament of Love, which appears
there first, is one of the non-Chaucerian pieces. This a
new point, in the writer's belief, for Warton and later bio¬
graphers, including Sir Harris Nicolas, attribute it to Chaucer,
though the last notices the contradiction it seems to give
to the tradition of Chaucer's committal to the Tower, etc.
Quotation from the end of The Testament of Love, in which
Troilus and its author are highly praised; an impossibility
for Chaucer to have written this. Thus all that the book
contains as to the author's share in the tumults in the city
and his imprisonment does not apply to Chaucer. This
conclusion supported by a comparison of style. The Testament
of Love probably written by some admiring imitator of
Chaucer's translation of Boethius.]
See also below, Notes and Queries, 1867, Collier
