
102 [Baynes.] Five Hundred Years of [A.D. 1870
throughout the whole of the seventeenth century. Down to
the beginning of the eighteenth century, indeed, the collected
works of our more celebrated poets generally appeared in
the folio form, and the folio belongs to the pre-critical period
of our literary history. Urry’s ambitious work, which ap¬
peared in 1721 and has the distinction of being the tallest of
all the Chaucer folios, is certainly no exception. The licen¬
tious alterations of the text, in which Urry habitually in¬
dulged, have simply made it perversely corrupt in every
part. . . .
[p. 10] The first editor of any part of Chaucer's works who dis¬
played anything like the spirit and power of genuine criticism
was undoubtedly Dr. Thomas Morell, best remembered per¬
haps by his learned 'Thesaurus' ... Dr. Morell was, how¬
ever, an English as well as a classical scholar, having edited
Spenser, and commenced the publication of the 'Canterbury
Tales' on a thoroughly complete and satisfactory plan. The
only matter of regret is that he did not carry out his admirable
scheme and finish the work he had so well begun. The first
volume of the projected work, and we believe the only one
ever issued, appeared in 1737, and was entitled 'The Can¬
terbury Tales of Chaucer in the original, from the most
authentic manuscripts, with references to authors ancient
and modern, various readings, and explanatory notes.'
This volume contains the 'Prologue' and the 'Knight’s
Tale,' a modern version of each being appended to the
original text. Tyrwhitt refers to it in terms of high but just
praise; and it appears from his reference to have been the
only part of the work that had been published. ... This
part is, however, quite sufficient to show that in undertaking
to edit Chaucer Dr. Morell took a just and comprehensive
view of the work to be done, and that he possessed many
of the higher qualities essential to its successful execution.
His plan includes minute attention both to text and com¬
mentary; and in dealing with the text 'he set out,' says
Tyrwhitt,  'upon the only rational plan, that of collating the
best manuscripts and selecting from them the genuine read¬
ings.' [Then follow comments and quotations on Morell and
Urry’s views of Chaucer’s versification.]
[p. 12] Tyrwhitt comes next as an editor of Chaucer, and his
