1819. Campbell, Thomas. Specimens of the British Poets, vol. i.
References to Chaucer’s language, p. 14; metre, p. 59; Sir Thopas,
p. 60; Chaucer and Langland, pp. 62-3; Court of Love, p. 70;
romance, pp. 70-71; Hous of Fame, p. 71; Flower and Leaf,
p. 72; Gower, p. 73; Chaucer and his successors, pp. 79, 87-88;
vol. ii, pp. 3-49 [biographical notice, followed by Prol., ll. 1-714],
50, 59-60, 67-9 [Scottish Poetry], 76, 77.
[The edition consists of an Essay on English Poetry, vol. i, pp.
3-271, and a general index in the same vol, followed by extracts
from the principal poets, each preceded by a biographical notice.
The preliminary Essay was published separately, Boston, 1819,
and, with the Biographical Notices, edited by Peter Cunningham,
in 1848. The Chaucer references in the latter are, pp. 7, 9n. ,
23, 26, 27, 28, 29, 31-34, 37, 47 and n., 52, 53 n., 104 and n.,
108 n., 117 n., 120-36, 138, 163, 303 n., 396 n.]
[vol. i,  Chaucer was probably known and distinguished as a poet
pp. 70 -
2]
anterior to the appearance of Langlande's Visions. Indeed if
he had produced nothing else than his youthful poem, "the
Court of Love," it was sufficient to indicate one destined to
harmonise and refine the national strains. But it is likely,
that before his thirty-fourth year, about which time Langlande's
Visions may be supposed to have been finished, Chaucer had
given several compositions to the public.
[Campbell continues that the simple old narrative romance
had become too familiar to invite Chaucer, and the poverty of
English had obliged him to seek models in Latin and foreign
tongues. Ovid, Claudian, Statius and Boethius were the
favourite Latins, by the allegory of the last two of whom he
was influenced, as by the French allegorical romances. The
dreams, emblems, etc., of this last visionary school proved too
light and playful for his strong genius, though in this work,
too, his peculiar grace and gaiety are conspicuous. The Hous
of Fame and Flower and Leaf are examples. His similar
poems, even the most fantastic in design, are relieved by
fresh and joyous descriptions of nature.  ... Chaucer was
subsequently drawn to the style of Boccaccio.]
. . . . . . . . . .
[vol. ii, [Tyrwhitt had vindicated Chaucer from the charge brought
pp. 18,
14]
against him by Verstegan, etc., of having adulterated English
with French words. Such revolutions in language are not
wrought by individuals; and Chaucer's style will compare
with that of Gower, Wyclif and Mandeville.]
 . . . . . . . . . .
[p.15]... He has a double claim to rank as the founder of English
poetry, from having been the first to make it the vehicle of
spirited representations of life and native manners, and from
having been the first great architect of our versification, in
giving our language the ten syllable, or heroic measure, which,
though it may sometimes be found among the lines of more
ancient versifiers, evidently comes in only by accident. This
measure occurs in the earliest poem that is attributed to him,
The Court of Love.  ... It is a dream, in which the poet
fancies himself taken to the Temple of Love, introduced to a
mistress, and sworn to observe the statutes of the amatory
[p. 16] god. As the earliest work of Chaucer, it interestingly ex¬
hibits the successful effort of his youthful hand in erecting a
new and stately fabric of English numbers. As a piece of
fancy, it is grotesque and meager [sic]; but the lines often
flow with great harmony.
His story of Troilus and Cresseide was the delight of Sir
Philip Sydney; and perhaps, excepting the Canterbury Tales,
was, down to the time of Queen Elizabeth, the most popular
poem in the English language. It is a story of vast length
and almost desolate simplicity, and abounds in all those
glorious anachronisms which were then, and so long after, per¬
mitted to romantic poetry: such as making the son of King
Priam read the Thebais of Statius, and the gentlemen of Troy
converse about the devil, justs and tournaments, bishops,
parliaments, and scholastic divinity.
The languor of the story is, however, relieved by many
touches of pathetic beauty. The confession of Cresseide in
the scene of felicity, when the poet compares her to the "new
abashed nightingale, that stinteth first ere she beginneth sing,"
is a fine passage, deservedly noticed by Warton. The grief of
Troilus after the departure of Cresseide is strongly portrayed
in Troilus's soliloquy in his bed.
. . . . . . . . . .
[p 17] The sensations of Troilus, on coming to the house of his
faithless Cresseide, when, instead of finding her returned, he
beholds the barred doors and shut windows, giving tokens of
her absence, as well as his precipitate departure from the
distracting scene, are equally well described.
. . . . . . . . . .
The two best of Chaucer's allegories, The Flower and the
Leaf, and The House of Fame, have been fortunately per¬
[p.18] petuated in our language; the former by Dryden, the latter by
Pope. The Flower and the Leaf is an exquisite piece of fairy
fancy.  ... Pope had not so enchanting a subject in The
House of Fame; yet, with deference to Warton, that critic
has done Pope injustice in assimilating his imitations of
Chaucer to the modern ornaments in Westminster Abbey,
which impair the solemn effect of the ancient building. The
many absurd and fantastic particulars in Chaucer's House of
Fame will not suffer us to compare it, as a structure in poetry,
with so noble a pile as Westminster Abbey in architecture.
Much of Chaucer's fantastic matter has been judiciously
omitted by Pope, who at the same time has clothed the best
ideas of the old poem in spirited numbers and expression.
Chaucer supposes himself to be snatched up to heaven by a
large eagle, who addresses him in the name of St. James and
the Virgin Mary, and, in order to quiet the poet's fears of
being carried up to Jupiter, like another Ganymede, or turned
into a star like Orion, tells him, that Jove wishes him to
sing of other subjects than love and "blind Cupido," and
has therefore ordered, that Dan Chaucer should be brought
to behold the House of Fame. In Pope, the philosophy of
[p. 19] fame comes with much more propriety from the poet himself,
than from the beak of a talkative eagle.
It was not until his green old age that Chaucer put forth,
in the Canterbury Tales, the full variety of his genius, and
the pathos and romance, as well as the playfulness of fiction.
In the serious part of those tales he is, in general, more deeply
indebted to preceding materials, than in the comic stories,
which he raised upon slight hints to the air and spirit of
originals.  ...
Chaucer's design... though it is left unfinished, has
definite boundaries, and incidents to keep alive our curiosity,
independent of the tales themselves. At the same time, while
the action of the poem is an event too simple to divert the
attention altogether from the pilgrims' stories, the pilgrimage
itself is an occasion sufficiently important to draw together
almost all the varieties of existing society, from the knight to
the artisan, who, agreeably to the old simple manners, assemble
in the same room of the hostellerie. The enumeration of those
[p. 20] characters in the Prologue forms a scene, full, without con¬
fusion; and the object of their journey gives a fortuitous air
to the grouping of individuals, who collectively represent
the age and state of society in which they live.
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. 21] Chaucer's forte is description; much of his moral reflection
is superfluous; none of his characteristic painting. His men
and women are not mere ladies and gentlemen, like those
who furnish apologies for Boccaccio's stories. They rise before
us minutely traced, profusely varied, and strongly discrimi¬
nated. Their features and casual manners seem to have an
amusing congruity with their moral characters. He notices
minute circumstances as if by chance; but every touch has
its effect to our conception so distinctly, that we seem to live
and travel with his personages throughout the journey.