1803. Godwin, William. Life of Geoffrey Chaucer, 2 vols, London,
1803.
[Vol. i. ch. xv, pp. 277-297, a long analysis of Troilus and
[p. 298] Creseide.] From this analysis of the poem, it is not difficult to
infer the degree of applause to which its author is entitled. It has
already been observed by one of the critics upon English poetry
[Warton, vol. i, sect. 14], that it is "almost as long as the
Æneid." Considered in this point of view, the Troilus and
Creseide will not appear to advantage. It is not an epic poem.
[p. 299]... It is merely a love-tale. It is not the labour of a man's
life; but a poem which, with some previous knowledge of
human sentiments and character, and a very slight prepar¬
ation of science, the writer might perhaps be expected to
complete in about as many months, as the work is divided into
books....
It is... considerably barren of incident. There is not
enough in it of matter generating visible images in the reader,
and exciting his imagination with pictures of nature and life.
There is not enough in it of vicissitudes of fortune.... Add
to which, the catastrophe is unsatisfactory and offensive....
[p. 300] Dryden thoroughly felt this defect in the poem of Chaucer,
and has therefore changed the catastrophe when he fitted the
story for the stage, and represented the two lovers as faithful,
but unfortunate.
But, when all these deductions have been made from the
claims of the Troilus and Creseide upon our approbation, it
will still remain a work interspersed with many beautiful
passages, passages of exquisite tenderness, of great delicacy,
and of a nice and refined observation of the workings of
human sensibility. Nothing can be more beautiful, genuine,
and unspoiled by the corrupt suggestions of a selfish spirit,
than the sentiments of Chaucer's lovers. While conversing
with them, we seem transported into ages of primeval
innocence. Even Creseide is so good, so ingenuous and
affectionate, that we feel ourselves as incapable as Troilus,
of believing her false. Nor are the scenes of Chaucer's
narrative... drawn with that vagueness of manner, and
ignorance of the actual emotions of the heart, which, while
we read them, we nauseate and despise. On the contrary,
his personages always feel, and we confess the truth of their
feelings.
[p. 301] Pandarus himself comes elevated and refined from the pen
of Chaucer: his occupation loses its grossness, in the dis¬
interestedness of his motive, and the sincerity of his friendship.
In a word, such is the Troilus and Creseide, that no competent
judge can rise from its perusal without a strong impression of
the integrity and excellence of the author's disposition, and of
the natural relish he entertained for whatever is honourable,
beautiful and just....
The poem will appear to be little less than a miracle, when
we combine our examination of it, with a recollection of the times
and circumstances in which it was produced. [The “languid
[p. 302] and perishing” state of the English tongue in Chaucer's
time.]... [Chaucer] surprised his countrymen with a poem,
eminently idiomatic, clear and perspicuous in its style, as well
[p. 303] as rich and harmonious in its versification.... The loves of
Troilus and Creseide scarcely retain any traces of the pre¬
posterous and rude manners of the age in which they were
delineated.
This poem therefore, as might have been expected, long
fixed upon itself the admiration of the English nation....
[It] was probably, more than any of his other works, the basis
of his fame, and the foundation of his fortune.¹
[vol. ii,
p. 572]
This Canterbury Tales is [sic] the great basis of the fame of
Chaucer, and indolent men have generally expressed themselves
with contempt of the rest of his works as unworthy of atten¬
tion.... He indeed who wishes to become personally ac¬
quainted with Chaucer, must of necessity have recourse to his
minor pieces. The Canterbury Tales are too full of business,
variety, character and action, to permit the writer in any great
degree to show himself.... The Troilus and Creseide in
particular, that poem of which Sir Philip Sidney speaks
with so much delight, though deficient in action, cannot be
[p. 573] too much admired for the suavity and gentleness of nature
which it displays.... All the milder and more delicate
feelings of the soul are displayed... and displayed in a
manner which none but a poet of the purest and sweetest
dispositions, and at the same time of the greatest discrimina¬
tion, could have attained.
The Canterbury Tales is certainly one of the most extra¬
ordinary monuments of human genius...
What infinite variety of character is presented to us in
the Prologue to the Canterbury Tales! It is a copious and
extensive review of the private life of the fourteenth century
in England.
This has usually, and perhaps justly, been thought the most
conspicuous excellence of Chaucer; his power of humour, of
delineating characters, and of giving vivacity and richness to
comic incidents.
. . . . . . .
[¹ For Charles Lamb's remarks upon this criticism, see below, 1803.]
[p. 532] His best works, his Canterbury Tales in particular, have an
absolute merit, which stands in need of no extrinsic accident
to show it to advantage, and no apology to atone for its
concomitant defects. They class with whatever is best in
the poetry of any country or any age. Yet when we further
recollect that they were written in a remote and semi-barbarous
age, that Chaucer had to a certain degree to create a language,
or to restore to credit a language which had been sunk in
vulgarity and contempt by being considered as a language
[p. 533] of slaves,... the astonishment and awe with which we
regard the great father of English poetry must be exceedingly
increased...