1820. Hunt, James Henry Leigh. Mayday, [in] The Indicator, April
26, 1820, pp. 228-31.
But when morning pleasures are to be spoken of, the lovers
of poetry who do not know Chaucer, are like those who do not
know what it is to be up in the morning. He has left us two
exquisite pictures of the solitary observance of May, in his
"Palamon and Arcite." They are the more curious inasmuch
as the actor in one is a lady, and in the other a knight. How
far they ewe any of their beauty to his original, the “Theseide"
of Boccaccio, we cannot say.  ... To begin, as in duty
bound, with the lady. How she sparkles through the anti¬
quity of the language, like a young beauty in an old hood!
Thus passeth yere by yere, and day by day,
Tille it felle ones in a morrowe of May,
That Emelie–
But we will alter the spelling where we can, as in a former
instance, merely to let the reader see what a notion is in his
way if he suffers the look of Chaucer's words to prevent his
enjoying him.
Thus passeth year by year, and day by day,
[and 29 more lines, ending]
There as this Emily had her playning.
Bright was the sun, and clear that morwèning—
[Knightes Tale, ll. 103-62.]
How finely, to our ears at least, the second line of the
couplet always rises up from this full stop at the first!
Bright was the sun, and clear that morwèning
[and seven more lines].
Sir Walter Scott, in his edition of Dryden [q.v. above,
1808], says upon the passage before us, and Dryden’s version
of it, that 'the modern must yield the palm to the ancient,
in spite of the beauty of his versification.’ We quote from
memory, but this is the substance of his words. For our parts
we agree with them, as to the consignment of the palm, but
not as to the exception about the versification. With some
allowance as to our present mode of accentuation, it appears
to us to be touched with a finer sense of music even than
Dryden's. It is more delicate, without any inferiority in
strength, and still more various.
[A comparison of Chaucer's and Dryden's descriptions of
Arcite follow–both passages are quoted and Dryden's
declared inferior. The passage ends:]
There was as much difference between him and his original,
as between a hot noon in perukes at St. James's, and one of
Chaucer's lounges on the grass, of a May morning.