1817. Hazlitt, William. Characters of Shakespear's Plays. (Collected
Works of William Hazlitt, ed. Waller and Glover, 1902-6, 13 vols.,
vol. i, pp. 224-7, 332, 358.)
[pp. 224-5] [Comparison of the characters in Chaucer's Troilus and
in Shakspere's:] The difference of the manner in which the
subject is treated arises less from intention, than from the
different genius of the two poets. There is no double entendre
in the characters of Chaucer: they are either quite serious or
quite comic... We see Chaucer's characters as they saw
themselves, not as they appeared to others or might have
appeared to the poet. He is as deeply implicated in the
affairs of his personages as they could be themselves...
There is little relief, or light and shade in his pictures...
Shakespear never committed himself to his characters... His
genius was dramatic, as Chaucer's was historical...
[p. 226] Chaucer attended chiefly to the real and natural, that is,
to the involuntary and inevitable impressions on the mind in
given circumstances; Shakespear exhibited also the possible
and the fantastical–not only what things are in themselves,
but whatever they might seem to be, their different reflections,
their endless combinations. He lent his fancy, wit, invention,
to others, and borrowed their feelings in return. Chaucer
excelled in the force of habitual sentiment; Shakespear added
to it every variety of passion, every suggestion of thought or
accident. Chaucer described external objects with the eye of
a painter, or he might be said to have embodied them with
the hand of a sculptor,... Shakespear's imagination threw
over them a lustre
"Prouder than when blue Iris bends."
Every thing in Chaucer has a downright reality.  ... In
Shakespear the commonest matter-of-fact has a romantic grace
about it; or seems to float with the breath of imagination in
a freer element. No one could have more depth of feeling
or observation than Chaucer, but he wanted resources of in¬
vention to lay open the stores of nature or the human heart
with the same radiant light, that Shakespear has done.
However fine or profound the thought, we know what is
coming, whereas the effect of reading Shakespear is "like the
eye of vassalage at unawares encountering majesty." Chaucer's
mind was consecutive, rather than discursive. He arrived at
truth through a certain process; Shakespear saw everything by
intuition. Chaucer had a great variety of power, but he could
do only one thing at once. He set himself to work on a par¬
ticular subject. His ideas were kept separate, labelled, ticketed
and parcelled out in a set form, in pews and compartments
by themselves. They did not play into one another's hands.
They did not re-act upon one another.  ... There is
something hard and dry in them. What is the most wonderful
thing in Shakespear's faculties is their excessive sociability,
and how they gossiped and compared notes together.
[Passages from each poet are cited and compared.]