1803. Lamb, Charles. Two Letters to William Godwin, [dated] Nov. 8
[and] Nov. 10, 1803. (Works of Charles and Mary Lamb, ed.
E. V. Lucas, 1903-5, 7 vols, vol. vi, pp. 281-2.)
Nov. 8, 1803.
MY DEAR SIR,—I have been sitting down for three or
four days successively to the review [of Godwin's Life of
Chaucer], which I so much wished to do well, and to your
satisfaction. But I can produce nothing but absolute flatness
and nonsense. My health and spirits are so bad, and my
nerves so irritable, that I am sure, if I persist, I shall teaze
myself into a fever....
You will give me great satisfaction by sealing my pardon
and oblivion in a line or two, before I come to see you, or I
shall be ashamed to come.
Your, with great truth,
C. Lamb.
Nov. 10, 1803.
DEAR GODWIN,— You never made a more unlucky and per¬
verse mistake than to suppose that the reason of my not
writing that cursed thing was to be found in your book. I
assure you most sincerely that I have been greatly delighted
with Chaucer. I may be wrong, but I think there is one
considerable error runs through it, which is a conjecturing
spirit, a fondness for filling out the picture by supposing what
Chaucer did and how he felt, where the materials are scanty.
So far from meaning to withhold from you (out of mistaken
tenderness) this opinion of mine, I plainly told Mrs. Godwin
that I did find a fault, which I should reserve naming until I
should see you and talk it over. This she may very well
remember, and also that I declined naming this fault until
she drew it from me by asking me if there was not too much
fancy in the work. I then confessed generally what I felt.
... I remember also telling Mrs. G. (which she may have
dropt) that I was by turns considerably more delighted than
I expected.... I even had conceived an expression to meet
you with, which was thanking you for some of the most
exquisite pieces of criticism I had ever read in my life. In
particular I should have brought forward that on“Troilus and
Cressida" and Shakespear, which it is little to say delighted
me, and instructed me.... All these things I was preparing
to say, and bottling them up till I came... when lo! this
deadly blight intervened.
I certainly ought to make great allowances for your mis¬
understanding me. You... cannot conceive of the desultory
and uncertain way in which I (an author by fits) sometimes
cannot put the thoughts of a common letter into sane prose.
[Lamb enlarges upon his utter inability to write at times.] I
wrote such stuff about Chaucer, and got into such digressions,
quite irreducible into 1⅕ column of a paper, that I was perfectly
ashamed to show it you. However, it is become a serious
matter that I should convince you I neither slunk from the
task through a wilful deserting neglect, or through any (most
imaginary on your part) distaste of Chaucer; and I will try
my hand again, I hope with better luck. My health is bad
and my time taken up, but all I can spare between this and
Sunday shall be employed for you, since you desire it: and
if I bring you a crude, wretched paper on Sunday, you
must burn it, and forgive me; if it proves anything better
than I predict, may it be a peace-offering of sweet incense
between us.
C. Lamb.
[Lamb's review of Godwin's Life of Chaucer has not been identified. Perhaps it
was never completed, or perhaps Godwin burnt it when they met on the Sunday.
See Letter 202, and notes, Lucas's edn., vol. i, p. 463, vol. iii, p. 473, and vol. vi,
pp. 450, 451-2, where Lamb tells Wordsworth that his review of the Excursion was
the first review he ever wrote.]