1823. [Hunt, James Henry Leigh ?] The Book of Beginnings, [a poem,
in] The Liberal, vol. ii, pp. 98, 114, 115, 117-18 n., 122 n., 124-5n.
[p. 117] [Note] Where the cold waters lull old Sleep to sleep.—See
Chaucer's Dream [i. e. The Book of the Duchesse], beginning
I have great wonder, by this light,
How I live :—
for there is another [poem] under the same title: [i. e. the
non-Chaucerian Isle of Ladies]. The poem in question is
full of the deepest imagination and sentiment. The beginning
conveys some touching information respecting the poet him¬
self.  ...
[p. 122] Among other poets, who begin small compositions in a
spirited and enjoying manner, I must not omit Theocritus
and Chaucer.  ...
[p.124] I have gone a great way from Chaucer, but it is always
easy to return to him. His exquisite series of portraits, at
the beginning of the Canterbury Tales, may be accounted
a string of happy exordiums. But see also the dream referred
to in note 6, The Complaint of Mars and Venus, The Flower
and the Leaf, etc., never forgetting the exordium of the Wife
of Bath's Tale, in which he jokes the friars so happily upon
their succeeding to the ubiquitous privileges of the fairies.
Readers of taste, who have suffered themselves to be dis¬
mayed by the imaginary difficulties of Chaucer's language,
are astonished when they come to find how melodious, as
well as easy to read, is this "rude old poet" as some have
called him.—The syllables, it is to be observed, that form the
plural terminations, are to be pronounced,–motès, burghès,
etc., as they are to this day in many instances among the
uneducated classes of the Metropolis; and it is a pity we
ever left off pronouncing them, our consonants being at all
times too ready to crowd together, and thrust out their softer
neighbours, like fellows in a pit at the theatre. The final e
also in many words must be humoured, as it still is in French
poetry, the common ancestor of our own.
In oldè dayès of the King Artoùr
[and 23 following lines : Wife of Bath's Tale, ll. 857-80].