1808. Scott, Sir Walter. Works of John Dryden, 18 vols., vol. i, Life
of John Dryden, pp. 171, 427, 430, 441, 444, 494-96, 498-503, 505.
Notes to Troilus and Cressida, vol. vi, pp. 228, 229, 230.
Notes to Preface to the Fables, vol. xi, pp. 215, 216, 217, 220, 221,
222, 223, 226, 230, 232, 233, 235.
Notes to Palamon and Arcite, vol. xi, pp. 243 [a long note on the
origins of the Knight's Tale, with critical remarks on Chaucer's
treatment of it], 245, 246, 255, 256, 267, 280, 286, 287, 289, 303,
309, 311, 312.
Notes to The Cock and the Fox, vol. xi, pp. 326 [critical remarks
on Chaucer's treatment], 333, 339, 343, 350, 352.
Notes to The Flower and the Leaf, vol. xi, pp. 354, 372.
Notes to The Wife of Bath, vol. xi, pp. 376 [critical remarks on
Chaucer's tale], 378, 382.
Note on Good Parson, vol. xi, p. 394.
[Vol.i,  The “Knight's Tale," the longest and most laboured of
p. 494]
Chaucer’s stories, possesses a degree of regularity which might
satisfy the most severe critic. [The honour of this, says
Scott, is due to Chaucer. Passages follow on Dryden's treat¬
ment of the Knight’s Tale.]
 . . . . . . . . . .
[p. 498] With Chaucer, Dryden’s task was more easy than with
Boccacio. Barrenness was not the fault of the Father of
English poetry; and amid the profusion of images which he
presented, his imitator had only the task of rejecting or
selecting. In the sublime description of the temple of Mars,
painted around with all the misfortunes ascribed to the influ¬
ence of his planet, it would be difficult to point out a single
idea, which is not found in the older poem. But Dryden has
judiciously omitted or softened some degrading and some dis¬
gusting circumstances; as the “cook scalded in spite of his
long ladle,” the “swine devouring the cradled infant," the
" pick-purse," and other circumstances too grotesque or
ludicrous, to harmonize with the dreadful group around them.
Some points, also, of sublimity, have escaped the modern
poet. Such is the appropriate and picturesque accompaniment
of the statue of Mars:
A wolf stood before him at his feet
With eyen red, and of a man he eat.
In the dialogue, or argumentative parts of the poem, Dryden
has frequently improved on his original, while he falls some¬
thing short of him in simple description, or in pathetic effect.
Thus, the quarrel between Arcite and Palamon is wrought up
with greater energy by Dryden than Chaucer, particularly by
the addition of the following lines, describing the enmity of
the captives against each other:
Now friends no more, nor walking hand in hand,
But when they met, they made a surly stand
And glared like angry lions as they pass'd,
And wish'd that every look might be their last.
But the modern must yield the palm, despite the beauty of
his versification, to the description of Emily by Chaucer; and
may be justly accused of loading the dying speech of Arcite
with conceits for which his original gave him no authority.
 . . . . . . . . . .
[p. 501] [The French element in Chaucer's language.]
[p. 502] Upon the whole, in introducing these romances of Boccacio
and Chaucer to modern readers, Dryden has necessarily de¬
prived them of some of the charms which they possess for
those who have perused them in their original state.  ...
To antiquaries Dryden has sufficiently justified himself, by
declaring his version made for the sake of modern readers,
who understand sense and poetry as well as the old Saxon
admirers of Chaucer, when that poetry and sense are put into
words which they can understand. Let us also grant him that
for the beauties which are lost, he has substituted many which
the original did not afford; that, in passages of gorgeous
description, he has added even to the chivalrous splendour
[p. 503] of Chaucer, and has graced with poetical ornament the sim¬
plicity of Boccacio; that, if he has failed in tenderness, he is
never deficient in majesty.
[Vol. xi,   The “Knight's Tale," whether Chaucer's or Dryden's
 . . . . . . . . . .
p. 245]
version, is one of the finest pieces of composition in our
language.   ... The work of Chaucer cannot, however, properly
be termed a translation; on the contrary, the tale has acquired
its most beautiful passages under the hand of the English
bard. He abridged the prolix, and enlarged the poetical,
parts of the work; compressed the whole into one concise
and interesting tale; and left us an example of a beautiful
heroic poem.
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. 326] [Note before “The Cock and the Fox."] Tyrwhitt
detected the original of this fable in the translation of ❝Æsop,❞
made by Marie of France into Norman-French... But the
hand of genius gilds what it touches; and the naked Apologue,
which may be found in Tyrwhitt's ❝Preliminary Discourse,❞
was amplified by Chaucer into a poem, which, in grave, ironical
narrative, liveliness of illustration, and happiness of humorous
description, yields to none that ever was written.
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. 376] [Note before “The Wife of Bath."]... What was a mere
legendary tale of wonder in the rhime of the minstrel, and a
vehicle for trite morality in that of Gower, in the verse of Chaucer
reminds us of the resurrection of a skeleton, reinvested by a
miracle with flesh, complexion, and powers of life and motion.
Of all Chaucer's multifarious powers, none is more wonderful
than the humour, with which he touched upon natural frailty,
and the truth with which he describes the inward feelings of
the human heart; at a time when all around were employed in
composing romantic legends, in which the real character of
their heroes was as effectually disguised by the stiffness
of their manners as their shapes by the sharp angles and
unnatural projections of their plate armour.
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. 394] [Note before “The Character of a Good Parson."] This
beautiful copy of a beautiful original makes us regret, that
Dryden had not translated the whole Introduction to the
❝Canterbury Tales,❞ in which the pilgrims are so admirably
described. Something might have been lost for want of the
ancient Gothic lore, which the writers of our poet’s period did
not think proper to study; but when Dryden's learning
failed, his native stores of fancy and numbers would have
helped him through the task.
[In Cochrane's Catalogue of the Abbotsford Library, 1838, notices of Chaucer's works
in the Collection will be found at pp. 42, 154-5, 172, 185, 190, 239.]