1824. Unknown. The Works of Chaucer, [in] The Retrospective
Review, vol. ix, pp. 173-206.
[Researches into old writers very creditable to modern taste,
especially where, as in English, the language has undergone
considerable changes. This may be carried to excess, and
imitation be substituted for research.]
There is no reason, however, why the treasures of their wit
should not be among the objects of our study and research.
... They are the beacons and landmarks of our language, to
which our eyes should occasionally be turned.  . . . The
wisdom that is preserved in a language that is obsolete, is a
treasure buried in the earth, which we know not where to
delve for.
[p.174] In treasures of this description [i.e. of instruction and
delight] the neglected glebe of Chaucer is particularly affluent.
As a fabulist and a poet, Dryden gives him the decided
preference over Ovid: though Dryden, as we shall hereafter
shew, was not capable of appreciating all his beauties. But
there are other reasons for recommending him to the attention
of the English student.
To the philologist, he is a classic of the first order: for he
is pre-eminently the most conspicuous of the makers and
methodizers of the language: the first who taught it to flow
in expressive harmony, and gave to it consistency and energy.
Not that he invented and introduced a verbiage and idiom of
his own, or compounded, as some have supposed, a melange
of imported phraseology; but because, (as will be obvious to
those who consult his contemporaries, Lydgate, Gower,
Hocleve, Scogan, &c.) he selected and methodized from the
unsettled idioms then in use, what was fittest and most con¬
[p. 175] gruous, and gave consistence and solidity to that foundation,
upon which the polished structure of our present language has
gradually risen.
Even in point of rhythmical harmony, the obligations of our
language to Chaucer are not less decisive than in phraseology
and structure, and... in his versification are to be found,
not only the less rigid models of our present septasyllabic
and octosyllabic measures, but the exemplars also, which
Spenser has acknowledged, and of which Milton has availed
himself, of that heroic metre, to which the former gave so
much sweetness, and the latter such majestic sublimity:
. . . But it is not only to the philologist and the prosodist
that the memory of Chaucer should be dear. He has other
claims upon our admiration and gratitude, or he could never
have had these.  ...
That Chaucer had the soul, as well as the voice of poesy,
is sufficiently evinced in the admiration he has excited in
those who were neither familiar with his language, nor in
possession of the clue that would unravel the harmony of his
numbers : nay, who could not, from the defective transcripts
they consulted, or by their mode of pronunciation, make out
even the numerical proportion of his fect.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
[p. 176] It is not merely in a literary point of view, as works of
[p. 177] amusement and effusions of a poetical imagination, that the
writings of Chaucer are entitled to particular attention. They
are pregnant with instruction of a higher order. They are an
essential portion of the authentic history of his country;...
of the history of the national mind... The works of
Chaucer, his Canterbury Tales in particular,... bring the
genuine picture of society alive and breathing before us.  ...
The imaginative historian, who adorns his record with names
of his own creation, and selects the character he assigns to his
[p. 178] imaginary agents from the great book of nature,... may use
with freedom the genuine colours of truth, and delineate man
as he really is, with all the modifications of morals, manners,
and characteristics, which the institutions, the necessities, and
the habitudes of the age have imposed upon him. Whoever
does this is, in fact, an historian of the highest order : an his¬
torian, instructive, not to the statesman and politician only,
but to all who may peruse his record. And such an historian
is the great father of our English poetry—the venerable
Geffrey Chaucer.
[Here follows the life of Chaucer and some further criticism
of his poetry.]