1814. [Southey, Robert ?] Review of Chalmers' English Poets, [in] The
Quarterly Review, July 1814, vol. xi, pp. 482-4; Oct., vol. xii,
pp. 61, 64, 65, 67, 69, 73, 82-4.
[The passage on Chaucer's rejection of the ornate style at the end of the following
extract echoes Southey's words in his Specimens, q.v. above, 1807, closely enough to
warrant the provisional attribution of this review to him.]
[vol xi,
p. 482]
Chaucer himself was a star of the first magnitude: no
man ever did so much with a language in so rude a state, and
only Shakespeare has surpassed him in his intuitive know¬
ledge of human character, and the universality of his genius.
Mr. Chalmers indeed, with that comfortable self-satisfaction
which he derives from flourishing in the nineteenth century,
when the world has the advantage of being enlightened by
lectures on poetry, assures us that Chaucer's popularity is
gone by:—it may be so with those ladies and gentlemen who
conceive poetry to be 'the art of pleasing,' and believe that
nothing which requires thought can possibly give pleasure.
Chaucer has not written for critics and readers of this nature:
... the rank which the father of English poetry holds in
literature has not been assigned by caprice, or fashion, or
superstition. He whom Spenser called his master, and
whom Milton referred to as to his great and immortal prede¬
cessor, is justly placed with them in the first class of poets,
and his fame, like theirs, is for ever. It is a reproach to our
literature that the Canterbury Tales should be the only portion
of his works which have been edited with any degree of care
or ability.
[vol. xii,
p. 64]
He [the author of The Cid] built with rubbish and
unhewn stones; Dante and Petrarca with marble. Chaucer's
materials more resembled those of the Spaniard than of the
Italian poets. This has been in some degree unfortunate for
himself, inasmuch as the progressive improvement of our
tongue has at length rendered him obsolete, (or rather caused
him to be thought so,) and thus deprived him of that exten¬
sive and pre-eminent popularity which he long and deservedly
enjoyed. ...
[p. 65]
Chaucer drew much from the French and Italian poets,
but more from observation and the stores of his own wealthy
and prolific mind. Strong English sense, and strong English
humour characterize his original works. He caught with a
painter's hand the manners and features of the age; he beheld
the objects of external nature with a poet’s eye, and he pene¬
trated with a poet's intuition into the recesses of the human
heart. Dante holds a higher place in literature because he
wrought with materials which were capable of displaying and
preserving his exquisite skill. Dante may be classed above all
other poets for strength and severity of style: Nothing can be
worse than the plan of the Divina Commedia; the matter is
sometimes puerile, sometimes shocking, frequently dull, but
the style is uniformly perfect. Here Chaucer falls short of
him, but only here, where, from the state of the English
language, it was impossible that he should prove his equal:
in extent and variety of power he is greatly his superior.
[During the 15th century] there could be little encourage¬
ment for poetry, and what was produced chiefly consisted
either of dull translations, or vapid imitations of Chaucer.
The 'style ornate' had been introduced, and was sanctioned
by Chaucer's name: of the poems in that style which are
printed as his, many are of questionable authority; few traces
of it are to be found in his greater and better works; and it
seems probable that he just tried the experiment, and convinced
himself of its unfitness.