1809. Blake, William. Sir Jeffery Chaucer and the nine and twenty
Pilgrims on their Journey to Canterbury, [in] A Descriptive
Catalogue of Pictures, Poetical and Historical Inventions Painted
by William Blake in water colours, London, 1809, pp. 7-34.
[Printed in Life of William Blake, by Alex. Gilchrist, enlarged
edition, 1880, vol. ii, pp. 142-52.]
[For Lamb's appreciation of this article, see p. 49 below, 1810, H. Crabb Robinson.]
[p. 9] The characters of Chaucer's Pilgrims are the characters
which compose all ages and nations : as one age falls, another
rises, different to mortal sight, but to immortals only the same;
for we see the same characters repeated again and again, in
animals, vegetables, minerals, and in men; nothing new occurs
[p. 10] in identical existence: Accident ever varies, Substance can
never suffer change nor decay.
Of Chaucer's characters, as described in his Canterbury
Tales, some of the names or titles are altered by time, but the
characters themselves for ever remain unaltered, and conse¬
quently they are the physiognomies or lineaments of universal
human life, beyond which Nature never steps. Names alter,
things never alter. I have known multitudes of those who
would have been monks in the age of monkery, who in this
deistical age are deists. As Newton numbered the stars, and
as Linneus [sic] numbered the plants, so Chaucer numbered
the classes of men. ...
[p. 11] The Knight and Squire with the Squire's Yeoman lead the
procession, as Chaucer has also placed them first in his prologue.
The Knight is a true Hero, a good, great, and wise man; his
whole-length portrait on horseback, as written by Chaucer,
cannot be surpassed. He has spent his life in the field; has
ever been a conqueror, and is that species of character which in
every age stands as the guardian of man against the oppressor.
His son is like him with the germ of perhaps greater perfection
still, as he blends literature and the arts with his warlike
studies.  ... The Squire's Yeoman is also a great character, a
man perfectly knowing in his profession:
"And in his hand he bare a mighty bow."
Chaucer describes here a mighty man; one who in war is
the worthy attendant on noble heroes.
[p. 12] The Prioress follows these with her female chaplain.  ...
This Lady is described also as of the first rank; rich and
honoured. She has certain peculiarities and little delicate
affectations, not unbecoming in her, being accompanied with
what is truly grand and really polite; her person and face,
Chaucer has described with minuteness; it is very elegant,
and was the beauty of our ancestors, till after Elizabeth's
time, when voluptuousness and folly began to be accounted
[p.13] beautiful.  ... The Monk is described by Chaucer, as a man
of the first rank in society, noble, rich, and expensively
attended: he is a leader of the age, with certain humorous
accompaniments in his character, that do not degrade, but
render him an object of dignified mirth, but also with
accompaniments not so respectable.
The Friar is a character also of a mixed kind.
"A friar there was, a wanton and a merry;"
[p. 14] quent, amorous, witty, and satyrical; young, handsome and
but in his office he is said to be a "full solemn man :" elo¬
rich; he is a complete rogue; with constitutional gaiety enough
to make him a master of all the pleasures of the world...
It is necessary here to speak of Chaucer's own character,
that I may set certain mistaken critics right in their conception
of the humour and fun that occurs on the journey.
Chaucer is himself the great poetical observer of men, who
in every age is born to record and eternize its acts. This he
does as a master, as a father, and superior, who looks down on
their little follies from the Emperor to the Miller; sometimes
with severity, oftener with joke and sport.
[p. 16] one who studied poetical art.  ... Though a man of luxury,
Accordingly Chaucer has made his Monk a great tragedian,
pride and pleasure, he is a master of art and learning, though
affecting to despise it.  ...
For the Host who follows this group, and holds the center
of the cavalcade, is a first-rate character, and his jokes are no
trifles; they are always, though uttered with audacity, and
equally free with the Lord and the Peasant, they are always
substantially and weightily expressive of knowledge and
experience; Henry Baillie, the keeper of the greatest Inn, of
the greatest City; for such was the Tabarde Inn in Southwark,
near London: our Host was also a leader of the age.  ...
[p. 17] But I have omitted to speak of a very prominent character,
the Pardoner, the Age's Knave, who always commands and
domineers over the high and low vulgar. This man is sent
in every age for a rod and scourge, and for a blight, for a
trial of men, to divide the classes of men, he is in the most
holy sanctuary, and he is suffered by Providence for wise ends,
and has also his great use, and his grand leading destiny.
His companion the Sompnour, is also a Devil of the first
magnitude, grand, terrific, rich and honoured in the rank of
[p. 18] which he holds the destiny. The uses to society are perhaps
equal of the Devil and of the Angel; their sublimity, who can
dispute...
The principal figure in the next groupe is the Good Parson;
an Apostle, a real Messenger of Heaven, sent in every age for
its light and its warmth. This man is beloved and venerated
by all, and neglected by all: He serves all, and is served by
none; he is, according to Christ's definition, the greatest of his
age. Yet he is a Poor Parson of a town. Read Chaucer's
description of the Good Parson, and bow the head and the
knee to him, who, in every age sends us such a burning and a
shining light.  ...
[p. 19] Chaucer's characters live age after age. Every age is a
Canterbury Pilgrimage; we all pass on, each sustaining one or
[p.20] other of these characters; nor can a child be born, who is not
one of these characters of Chaucer. The Doctor of Physic is
described as the first of his profession; perfect, learned, com¬
pletely Master and Doctor in his art. Thus the reader will
observe, that Chaucer makes every one of his characters
perfect in his kind, every one is an Antique Statue; the
image of a class, and not of an imperfect individual.
[p. 20] ... The Franklin is one who keeps open table, who is the
genius of eating and drinking, the Bacchus; as the Doctor of
Physic is the Esculapius, the Host is the Silenus, the Squire
is the Apollo, the Miller is the Hercules, &c. Chaucer's
characters are a description of the eternal Principles that exist
in all ages. The Franklin is voluptuousness itself most nobly
pourtrayed....
[p.21] The Plowman is simplicity itself, with wisdom and strength
for its stamina. Chaucer has divided the ancient character of
Hercules between his Miller and his Plowman. Benevolence
is the Plowman's great characteristic, he is thin with excessive
labour, and not with old age, as some have supposed.  ...
Visions of these eternal principles or characters of human
[p. 22] life appear to poets, in all ages.  ... The Plowman of Chaucer
is Hercules in his supreme eternal state, divested of his
spectrous shadow; which is the Miller, a terrible fellow, such
as exists in all times and places, for the trial of men.   ...
[p. 24] The characters of Women Chaucer has divided into two
classes, the Lady Prioress and the Wife of Bath. Are not
these leaders of the ages of men? The lady prioress, in
some ages, predominates; and in some the wife of Bath, in
whose character Chaucer has been equally minute and exact;
because she is also a scourge and a blight. I shall say no
more of her, nor expose what Chaucer has left hidden; let
the young reader study what he has said of her : it is useful
as a scarecrow. There are of such characters born too many
for the peace of the world.
I come at length to the Clerk of Oxenford. This character
varies from that of Chaucer, as the contemplative philosopher
varies from the poetical genius. There are always these two
classes of learned sages, the poetical and the philosophical.
The painter has put them side by side, as if the youthful
[p. 25] clerk had put himself under the tuition of the mature poet.
Let the Philosopher always be the Servant and Scholar of
inspiration and all will be happy.
of Stothard’s rival picture and the prospectus of Schiavonetti's
[The rest of the section is devoted to a critical examination
engraving (q.v. above, p. 37, 1808), and Blake gives examples of
how carelessly Stothard has read Chaucer and how little he has
understood him. He calls the Squire a fop, which he is not;
he puts in three Monks instead of one; he places the Reeve
between the Knight and the Squire although Chaucer says
"And ever he rode hinderest of the rout."
He makes the Wife of Bath a blooming damsel, and the
Plowman old, and he introduces a character that Chaucer has
not, namely a Goldsmith. “All is misconceived, and its mis¬
execution is equal to its misconception."]