1804. Scott, Sir Walter. Review of Godwin's Life of Chaucer, [in] The
Edinburgh Review, vol. iii, Jan. 1804, art. xvi, pp. 437-52.
(Miscellaneous Prose Works of Sir Walter Scott, 30 vols., Edinburgh,
1834-71, vol. xvii, pp. 55-80.)
[p.55] The perusal of this title excited no small surprise in our
critical fraternity. The authenticated passages of Chaucer's
life may be comprised in half a dozen pages; and behold two
voluminous quartos!
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. 56] The reader will learn, with admiration, that Mr. William
[p. 57] Godwin’s two quarto volumes contain hardly the vestige of an
authenticated fact concerning Chaucer, which is not to be
found in the eight pages of Messrs. Thomas Tyrwhitt and
George Ellis. The researches into the records have only pro¬
duced one or two writs, addressed to Chaucer, while clerk of
the works; the several grants and passports granted to him by
Edward III and Richard II which had been referred to by
former biographers; together with the poet's evidence in a
court of chivalry, a contract about a house, and a solitary
receipt for half a year’s salary. These, with a few documents
referring to John of Gaunt, make the Appendix to the book,
and are the only original materials brought to light by the
labours of the author.
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. 65] The public are indebted to Mr. Godwin for the recovery of
[p. 66] Chaucer's evidence in a question about bearing arms, occurring
betwixt Scrope and Grosvenor*; but the manner in which it
is narrated, is a good illustration of the strained inferences
concerning Chaucer’s temper and disposition, deduced by his
biographer from the most common and trivial occurrences.
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. 68] Some particular passages of the life, are less fancifully and
more correctly delineated. Mr. Godwin combats, and in our
opinion successfully, the opinion of those who deny the
honourable claim of Thomas Chaucer, to call the poet father:
and he has vindicated the relation, which the Dreme of
Chaucer unquestionably bears to the History of John of
Gaunt.
The critical dissertations upon Troilus and Creside, and
Chaucer's other poems, have considerable merit. They are
the production of a man who has read poetry with taste and
feeling; and we wish sincerely, that instead of the strange
[p. 69]  farrago which he calls the life of Chaucer, he had given us a
correct edition of the miscellaneous poetry of the author, upon
the same plan with Mr. Tyrwhitt's admirable Canterbury
Tales.
. . . . . . . . . .
We were much surprised to find, that the Canterbury Tales,
[p 70] the most important, as well as the most exquisite, of Chaucer's
productions, have attracted so little of Mr. Godwin's attention.
He might have displayed, in commenting upon poems as varied
in subject as in beauty, his whole knowledge of the manners
of the middle ages, were it ten times more extensive. But
Mr. Godwin, beginning probably to write before he had con¬
sidered either the nature of his subject, or the probable length
of his work, had exhausted both his limits and materials ere
he came to the topic upon which he ought principally to have
dwelt. The characters, therefore, of the several pilgrims, so
exquisitely described, that each individual passes before the
eyes of the reader, and so admirably contrasted with each
other; their conversation and manners, the gallantry of the
Knight and Squire, the affected sentimentality of the Abbess,
the humour of mine Host, and the Wife of Bath; the pride
of the Monk, the humility of the Parson, the learning and
* We hold this to be the only circumstance of importance, which
Mr. Godwin’s researches have brought to light; and so far our thanks
are due to him.
poverty of the Scholar, with the rude but comic portraits of
the inferior characters, are, in the history of the life and age
of Chaucer, of which they form a living picture, passed over
in profound silence, or with very slight notice. The truth is,
Mr. Godwin's speed and strength were expended before he
came within sight of the goal, and he saw himself compelled
with a faint apology to abandon that part of his subject which
must have been universally interesting. The few remarks
which he has made upon the Canterbury Tales, induce us to
believe that he has seen and regretted his error; but it is a
poor excuse, after writing a huge book, to tell the reader that
it is but “superficial work,” because the author “came a novice
to such an undertaking.”
. . . . . . . . . .
[p.79] But, upon the whole, the Life of Chaucer, if an uninterest¬
[p. 80] ing, is an innocent performance; and were its prolixities and
superfluities unsparingly pruned (which would reduce the work
to about one fourth of its present size), we would consider it as
an accession of some value to English literature.