1818. Coleridge, Samuel Taylor. Notes of Lectures [of the course of
1818]. (Literary Remains of S. T. Coleridge, 1836-9, 4 vols, vol. i,
pp. 83, 88, 89, 231-3, 238.)
[p.83]  I dare make none [no excuse] for the gross and disgusting
licentiousness, the daring profaneness, which rendered the
Decameron of Boccaccio the parent of a hundred worse
children, fit to be classed among the enemies of the human
race;... which interposes a painful mixture in the humour
of Chaucer.
[p. 88] [Lecture III. The Troubadours–Boccaccio–Petrarch¬
Pulci—Chaucer—Spenser.].. Chaucer must be read with
an eye to the Norman-French Trouveres, of whom he is the best
representative in English. He had great powers of invention.
As in Shakspere, his characters represent classes, but in a
different manner; Shakspere’s characters are the representatives
of the interior nature of humanity, in which some element has
become so predominant as to destroy the health of the mind;
[p. 89] whereas Chaucer’s are rather representatives of classes of
manners. He is therefore more led to individualize in a mere
personal sense. Observe Chaucer's love of nature; and how
happily the subject of his main work is chosen. When you
reflect that the company in the Decameron have retired to a
place of safety from the raging of a pestilence, their mirth
provokes a sense of their unfeelingness; whereas in Chaucer
nothing of this sort occurs, and the scheme of a party on a
pilgrimage, with different ends and occupations, aptly allows
[p. 231] [On Style.] As an instance equally delightful and com¬
of the greatest variety of expression in the tales.
plete, of what may be called the Gothic Structure as contra¬
distinguished from that of the Greeks, let me cite a part of
our famous Chaucer's character of a parish priest as he
should be. Can it ever be quoted too often?
A good man thér was of religioun
[p. 233] Such change as really took place in the style of our
[and forty-five following lines].
literature after Chaucer's time, is with difficulty perceptible,
on account of the dearth of writers, during the civil wars
[p. 288] It is, indeed, worthy of remark that all our great poets
of the fifteenth century...
have been good prose writers, as Chaucer, Spenser, Milton;
and this probably rose from their just sense of metre.
[The remarks on Chaucer's prose are reported at greater length in the Tatler,
vol. ii, no. 224, May 23, 1831, p. 893.]