1818. Hazlitt, William. Lectures on the English Poets, pp. 25-6, 27,
41-85, 88, 90, 91, 99, 102, 135, 161, 162. (Collected Works of
William Hazlitt, ed. Waller and Glover, 1902-6, 13 vols., vol. v,
pp. 13, 19-46, 50-52, 68, 82, 99, 129, 146. See also Blackwood’s
Edinburgh Magazine, February, 1818, vol. ii, pp. 558-60.)
Lecture II. On Chaucer and Spenser.
[p. 19]... I shall take, as the subject of the present lecture,
Chaucer and Spenser, two out of four of the greatest names
in poetry, which this country has to boast. Both of them,
however, were much indebted to the early poets of Italy, and
may be considered as belonging, in a certain degree, to the
same school. . . . . . . .
[Here follows a short biography of Chaucer.]
[p. 20]  There is... an obvious similarity between the practical turn
of Chaucer's mind and the restless impatience of his character,
and the tone of his writings. Yet it would be too much to
attribute the one to the other as cause and effect: for Spenser,
whose poetical temperament was as effeminate as Chaucer's
was stern and masculine, was equally engaged in public
affairs, and had mixed equally in the great world.   ...
For while Chaucer's intercourse with the busy world, and
collision with the actual passions and conflicting interests of
others, seemed to brace the sinews of his understanding, and
gave to his writings the air of a man who describes persons
and things that he had known and been intimately concerned
in; the same opportunities, operating on a differently con¬
stituted frame, only served to alienate Spenser's mind the
more from the 'close-pent up' scenes of ordinary life.  ...
It is not possible for any two writers to be more opposite
in this respect. Spenser delighted in luxurious enjoyment;
Chaucer, in severe activity of mind. As Spenser was the most
romantic and visionary, Chaucer was the most practical of all
the great poets, the most a man of business and the world.
His poetry reads like history. Everything has a downright
reality; at least in the relator’s mind. A simile, or a sentiment,
is as if it were given in upon evidence. Thus he describes
Cressid’s first avowal of her love.
‘And as the new abashed nightingale, ...
That stinteth first when she beginneth sing,
. . . . . . . .
Right so Cresseide,...’ [etc., one stanza].
[Troilus, Bk. iii, ll. 1283-9.]
This is so true and natural, and beautifully simple, that
the two things seem identified with each other. Again, it is
said in the Knight's Tale–
‘Thus passeth yere by yere, and day by day [etc., to]
[p. 21] I n'ot which was the finer of hem two.’
[Knight's Tale, ll. 175-81.]
This scrupulousness about the literal preference, as if some
question of matter of fact was at issue, is remarkable.¹ I
might mention that other, where he compares the meeting
between Palamon and Arcite to a hunter waiting for a lion in
a gap ;—
‘That stondeth at a gap with a spere,’
[etc., four lines],
[Knight's Tale, ll. 781-4.]
or that still finer one of Constance, when she is condemned to
death—
‘Have ye not seen somtime a pale face?’
[etc., one stanza].
[Man of Law’s Tale, ll. 547-53.]
The beauty, the pathos here does not seem to be of the
poet's seeking, but a part of the necessary texture of the fable.
He speaks of what he wishes to describe with the accuracy,
the discrimination of one who relates what has happened to
himself, or has had the best information from those who have
been eye-witnesses of it. The strokes of his pencil always
tell. He dwells only on the essential, on that which would
be interesting to the persons really concerned: yet as he never
omits any material circumstance, he is prolix from the number
of points on which he touches, without being diffuse on any
one; and is sometimes tedious from the fidelity with which
he adheres to his subject, as other writers are from the
frequency of their digressions from it. The chain of his
story is composed of a number of fine links, closely connected
together, and riveted by a single blow. There is an instance
of the minuteness which he introduces into his most serious
[¹ See Gifford's criticism of this passage, 1818, above, and Hazlitt's answer
below, 1819.]
descriptions in his account of Palamon when left alone in his
cell:
‘Swiche sorrow he maketh that the grete tour
Resouned of his yelling and clamour,
The pure fetters on his shinnes grete
Were of his bitter salte teres wete.’
[Knight's Tale, ll. 419-22.]
[p. 22] The mention of this last circumstance looks like a part of the
instructions he had to follow, which he had no discretionary
power to omit or introduce at pleasure. He is contented to
find grace and beauty in truth. He exhibits for the most
part the naked object, with little drapery thrown over it.
His metaphors, which are few, are not for ornament, but use,
and as like as possible to the things themselves. He does
not affect to show his power over the reader's mind, but the
power which his subject has over his own. The readers of
Chaucer's poetry feel more nearly what the persons he
describes must have felt, than perhaps those of any other
poet. His sentiments are not voluntary effusions of the poet's
fancy, but founded on the natural impulses and habitual
prejudices of the characters he has to represent. There is an
inveteracy of purpose, a sincerity of feeling, which never
relaxes or grows vapid, in whatever they do or say. There
is no artificial, pompous display, but a strict parsimony of the
poet's materials, like the rude simplicity of the age in which
he lived. His poetry resembles the root just springing from
the ground, rather than the full-blown flower. His muse is
no ‘babbling gossip of the air,’ fluent and redundant; but,
like a stammerer, or a dumb person, that has just found the
use of speech, crowds many things together with eager haste,
with anxious pauses, and fond repetitions to prevent mistake.
His words point as an index to the objects, like the eye or
finger. There were none of the common-places of poetic
diction in our author’s time, no reflected lights of fancy, no
borrowed roseate tints; he was obliged to inspect things
for himself, to look narrowly, and almost to handle the
object, as in the obscurity of morning we partly see and
partly grope our way; so that his descriptions have a sort of
tangible character belonging to them, and produce the effect
of sculpture on the mind. Chaucer had an equal eye for
truth of nature and discrimination of character; and his
interest in what he saw gave new distinctness and force to
his power of observation. The picturesque and the dramatic
are in him closely blended together, and hardly distinguish¬
able; for he principally describes external appearances as
indicating character, as symbols of internal sentiment. There
is a meaning in what he sees; and it is this which catches
his eye by sympathy. Thus the costume and dress of the
Canterbury Pilgrims–of the Knight–the Squire–the Oxford
Scholar–the Gap-toothed Wife of Bath, and the rest, speak
for themselves...
[Quotation, Prol. ll. 118-29, 136-55, 165-207, 321-2, 449-52.]
[p. 24] Chaucer, it has been said [by Blake, q.v. above, 1809],
. . . . . .
numbered the classes of men, as Linnæus numbered the
plants. Most of them remain to this day: others that are
obsolete... still live in his descriptions of them. Such
is the Sompnoure:
‘A Sompnoure was ther with us in that place,
That hadde a fire-red cherubinnes face‘
[and following twenty-five lines, Prol. ll. 623-69, 688].
[p. 25] It would be a curious speculation (at least for those who
think that the characters of men never change, though
manners, opinions, and institutions may) to know what has
become of this character of the Sompnoure in the present day;
whether or not it has any technical representative in existing
professions; into what channels and conduits it has with¬
drawn itself, where it lurks unseen in cunning obscurity, or
else shows its face boldly, pampered into all the insolence of
office, in some other shape, as it is deterred or encouraged by
circumstances. Chaucer's characters modernised, upon this
principle of historic derivation, would be an useful addition
to our knowledge of human nature. But who is there to
undertake it?...
[Quotation, Knight's Tale, ll. 1270-1328.]
[p. 26] Chaucer's descriptions of natural scenery possess the
[p. 27] same sort of characteristic excellence, or what might be
termed gusto. They have a local truth and freshness, which
gives the very feeling of the air, the coolness or moisture of
the ground. Inanimate objects are thus made to have a
fellow-feeling in the interest of the story; and render back
the sentiment of the speaker's mind. One of the finest parts
in Chaucer is of this mixed kind. It is the beginning of the
Flower and the Leaf, where he describes the delight of that
young beauty, shrowded in her bower, and listening, in the
morning of the year to the singing of the nightingale.
[p. 28] It was the same trust in nature, and reliance on his
[Quotation, Floure and the Leaf, ed. Skeat, ll. 36-42, 78-133.]
[p. 29] patience of Griselda; the faith of Constance; and the heroic
subject, which enabled Chaucer to describe the grief and
perseverance of the little child, who, going to school through
the streets of Jewry,
‘Oh Alma Redemptoris mater, loudly sung,’ ¹
and who after his death, still triumphed in his song.
Chaucer has more of this deep, internal, sustained sentiment,
than any other writer, except Boccaccio. In depth of simple
pathos, and intensity of conception, never swerving from his
subject, I think no other writer comes near him, not even the
Greek tragedians.  ... I will take the following from the
Knight’s Tale. The distress of Arcite, in consequence of his
banishment from his love, is thus described:
‘Whan that Arcite to Thebes comen was,
Ful oft a day he swelt and said Alas,
[and fourteen following lines, Knight's Tale, ll. 497-513].
For sene his lady shall he never mo. ...’
This picture of the sinking of the heart, of the wasting
away of the body and mind, of the gradual failure of all the
faculties under the contagion of a rankling sorrow, cannot be
surpassed. Of the same kind is his farewel to his mistress,
after he has gained her hand and lost his life in the
combat:
Alas the wo! alas the peines stronge...
[and eight following lines, Knight's Tale, ll. 1913-21].
[p. 30] The death of Arcite is the more affecting, as it comes
after triumph and victory, after the pomp of sacrifice, the
solemnities of prayer, the celebration of the gorgeous rites
of chivalry. The descriptions of the three temples of Mars,
[ ¹ This line, which has two syllables too many, does not occur in the Prioresses
Tale.]
of Venus, and Diana, of the ornaments and ceremonies used
in each, with the reception given to the offerings of the
lovers, have a beauty and grandeur, much of which is lost in
Dryden’s version...
[Quotation, Knight’s Tale, ll. 1109-22.]
... The story of Griselda is in Boccaccio; but the Clerk of
Oxenforde, who tells it, professes to have learnt it from
Petrarch.  ... In spite of the barbarity of the circumstances,
which are abominable, the sentiment remains unimpaired and
unalterable. It is of that kind,  ‘that heaves no sigh, that
sheds no tear’; but it hangs upon the beatings of the heart;
it is a part of the very being; it is as inseparable from it as
the breath we draw. It is still and calm as the face of death.
Nothing can touch its ethereal purity: tender as the yielding
flower, it is fixed as the marble firmament. The only remon¬
strance she makes, the only complaint she utters against all
the ill-treatment she receives, is that single line where, when
turned back naked to her father's house, she says,
‘Let me not like a worm go by the way.’
[p. 31] The first outline given of the characters is inimitable:
‘Nought fer fro thilke paleis honourable’
[ten stanzas, Clerkes Tale, ll. 141-89, 218-38].
[p.32] The story of the little child slain in Jewry, (which is told
. . . . . . . . . .
by the Prioress, and worthy to be told by her who was ‘all
conscience and tender heart,’) is not less touching than that
of Griselda. It is simple and heroic to the last degree. The
poetry of Chaucer has a religious sanctity about it, connected
with the manners and superstitions of the age. It has all
the spirit of martyrdom.
It has also all the extravagance and the utmost licentiousness
of comic humour, equally arising out of the manners of the
time. In this too Chaucer resembled Boccaccio that he excelled
in both styles, and could pass at will 'from grave to gay,
from lively to severe;' but he never confounded the two
styles together (except from that involuntary and unconscious
mixture of the pathetic and humorous, which is almost always
to be found in nature), and was exclusively taken up with
what he set about, whether it was jest or earnest. The
[p. 33] Wife of Bath's Prologue (which Pope has very admirably
modernised) is, perhaps, unequalled as a comic story. The
Cock and the Fox is also excellent for lively strokes of
character and satire. January and May is not so good as
some of the others. Chaucer's versification, considering the
time at which he wrote, and that versification is a thing in a
great degree mechanical, is not one of his least merits. It
has considerable strength and harmony, and its apparent
deficiency in the latter respect arises chiefly from the altera¬
tions which have since taken place in the pronunciation or
mode of accenting the words of the language. The best
general rule for reading him is to pronounce the final e, as in
reading Italian.
It was observed in the last Lecture that painting describes
what the object is in itself, poetry what it implies or suggests.
Chaucer's poetry is not, in general, the best confirmation of
the truth of this distinction, for his poetry is more picturesque
and historical than almost any other. But there is one
instance in point.  ... It is the story of the three thieves who
go in search of Death to kill him, and who meeting with him,
are entangled in their fate by his words, without knowing him.
[p. 34] reality is in the mind’s eye.  ... Death is a mighty abstraction,
... The moral impression of Death is essentially visionary; its
like Night, or Space, or Time. He is an ugly customer, who
will not be invited to supper, or to sit for his picture. He
is with us and about us, but we do not see him.  ... Chaucer
knew this. He makes three riotous companions go in search
of Death to kill him, they meet with an old man whom they
reproach with his age, and ask why he does not die, to which
he answers thus:
Ne Deth, alas! ne will not han my lif
[and eleven following lines, Pardoner's Tale, ll. 399-410].
They then ask the old man where they shall find out
Death to kill him, and he sends them on an errand which
ends in the death of all three. We hear no more of him, but
it is Death that they have encountered!
 . . . . . . . . . .
[p. 46] The four greatest names in English poetry are almost the
four first we come to–Chaucer, Spenser, Shakespeare, and
Milton. There are no others that can really be put in com¬
petition with these. The two last had justice done them by
the voice of common fame. Their names are blazoned in the
very firmament of reputation; while the two first (though
"the fault has been more in their stars than in themselves
that they are underlings") cither never emerged far above
the horizon, or were too soon involved in the obscurity
of time. The three first of these are excluded from Dr.
Johnson's Lives of the Poets (Shakespeare indeed is so from
the dramatic form of his compositions).   ... In comparing
these four writers together, it might be said that Chaucer
excels as the poet of manners, or of real life... Chaucer
most frequently describes things as they are.... As poets,
and as great poets, imagination, that is, the power of feigning
things according to nature, was common to them all; but the
principle, or moving power, to which this faculty was most
subservient in Chaucer, was habit, or inveterate prejudice.
... The characteristic of Chaucer is intensity...
[p. 50] Chaucer's characters are sufficiently distinct from one
another, but they are too little varied in themselves, too much
like identical propositions. They are consistent, but uniform;
we get no idea of them from first to last; they are not
placed in different lights, nor are their subordinate traits
brought out in new situations; they are like portraits or
physiognomical studies, with the distinguishing features
marked with inconceivable truth and precision, but that
preserve the same unaltered air and attitude.  ... Chaucer's
characters are narrative.  ... That is, Chaucer told only as
much of his story as he pleased, as was required for a
particular purpose. He answered for his characters himself.
... In Chaucer we perceive a fixed essence of character...
[p. 52] Nearly all those [dialogues] in Shakespeare, where the
interest is wrought up to its highest pitch, afford example of
this dramatic fluctuation of passion. The interest in Chaucer
is quite different; it is like the course of a river, strong, and
full, and increasing.
[On Dryden and Pope.]
[p. 82] . . . His [Dryden's] alterations from Chaucer and
Boccaccio show a greater knowledge of the taste of his readers
and power of pleasing them, than acquaintance with the
genius of his authors. He ekes out the lameness of the
verse in the former, and breaks the force of the passion in
both. The Tancred and Sigismunda is the only general
exception, in which, I think, he has fully retained, if not
improved upon, the impassioned declamation of the original.
The Honoria has none of the bewildered, dreary, preternatural
effect of Boccaccio's story. Nor has the Flower and the Leaf
any thing of the enchanting simplicity and concentrated
feeling of Chaucer's romantic fiction. Dryden, however,
sometimes seemed to indulge himself as well as his readers,
as in keeping entire that noble line in Palamon’s address to
Venus:
Thou gladder of the mount of Cithæron!
His Tales have been, I believe, the most popular of his
works; and I should think that a modern translation of some
of the other serious tales in Boccaccio and Chaucer, as that of
Isabella, the Falcon, of Constance, the Prioress's Tale, and
others, if executed with taste and spirit, could not fail to
succeed in the present day.
[p. 146] I cannot say I ever learnt much about Shakespeare or
Milton, Spenser or Chaucer, from these professed guides
[some of the poets of the day]; for I never heard them say
much about them. They were always talking of themselves
and one another.
1818. Hazlitt, William. Lectures on the Comic Writers. On the
Works of Hogarth, etc. Delivered in 1818. (Collected Works of
William Hazlitt, ed. Waller and Glover, 1902-6, 13 vols., vol. viii,
pp. 144, 151.)
[p.144] [The contradictory faculties of embodying the serious and
ludicrous combined in Chaucer, Shakspere and Hogarth.]
1818. Hazlitt, William. A View of the English Stage, p. 239.
(Collected Works, ed. Waller and Glover, 1902-6, 13 vols., vol.
viii, p. 284, 371.)
p. 284] Chaucer spoke of the Monks historically, Shakespear
poetically.
[These theatrical criticisms appeared first in the Morning Chronicle, Champion,
Examiner and Times, 1813-17.]