1815-16. Nott, George Frederick. The Works of Henry Howard Earl
of Surrey and of Sir Thomas Wyatt the Elder, 2 vols.
Dissertation on the state of English Poetry before the
sixteenth century, vol. i, pp. cxxxvii-clxxvi, clxxxvi note,
clxxxviii-cxciii, cxc, cxcvi, cxcix, ccxxxi-ii, ccxxxv-vi,
ccxliii-vi, ccxlii-vi, ccxlix-li, cclxvii, cclxix-xx, cclxxxv. [In
the Notes to the poems there are many references to Chaucer,
pointing out passages and lines where Surrey has imitated him.]
Notes to Surrey’s Poems, vol. i, pp. 234, 236, 238-41, 243,
246-47, 249-50, 252, 257, 259-60, 263-66, 276, 278, 282,
284, 287, 289, 291, 295-97, 302-3, 306-7, 315-16, 318-24,
326, 329-30, 334-35, 337-39, 341, 348-49, 351-52, 356-57,
359, 361, 369, 372-73, 375, 380, 383, 387-88, 398, 401-11,
413, 417, 421, 424-25.
Vol. ii [Wyatt], pp. xxxii, xxxiii and note, lxxxvi, cliii and
note, clix and note, clx. Notes to Wyatt’s poems, vol. ii, pp.
538-41, 545-50, 552-53, 555-56, 558, 560-66, 568-72,
574-75, 577, 581-82.
[vol. i, Sect. IV. Of Chaucer's versification–that his verses were
p. clviii]
Decasyllables, but rhythmical–of the use and importance
of the cœsura in rhythmical versification.
It seems certain then that our versification anterior to
Chaucer, whether the lines were Alexandrine, Octosyllabic, or
Alliterative, was uniformly rhythmical. It now remains to
ascertain what were the alterations which Chaucer made.
First, he rejected alliteration. ... Secondly, he established
the practice of always changing the rhyme with the couplet.
... Thirdly, he introduced the Heroic stanza of seven
lines,...; a stanza, which for many centuries after was used
as the system of verse best suited to serious and elevated
subjects....
But the chief improvement introduced by Chaucer into
our versification was that of dropping altogether the use of
the Alexandrine line, and substituting the line of ten
syllables in its stead.  ...
But though Chaucer reduced our verse to ten syllables, he
suffered it to retain in other respects the properties of the
old Alexandrine verse. Like that it was divided by the old
cæsura into hemistichs; had the pause at the end, and was
recited rhythmically. It was still what Lydgate called "the
verse of Cadence." It is true that many of Chaucer's lines
[p.clix] have the appearance of being pure Iambic Decasyllables.
This however was the effect of accident. For accent and quan¬
tity, which are not of necessity the same, would sometimes
coincide, and when they did, a pure Iambic Decasyllable was
unavoidably the result. It was the frequent occurrence of
these fortuitous Iambic lines that led Mr. Tyrwhitt, and before
him Mr. Urry, and the learned Mr. Morell, to believe that
Chaucer's system of versification was altogether metrical. But
an impartial consideration of the subject, and a reference to
good MSS. must I think lead us to conclude that Chaucer had
not a metrical system of numbers in contemplation; but that,
on the contrary, he designed his verses to be read, like those of
all his contemporaries, with a cæsura and rhythmical cadence.
Should it be asked why so many Iambic lines are to be
found in Chaucer, the answer is obvious. Our language had
become more compressed. Most of the words in common use
had dropped their final syllables, and monosyllables were
multiplied. This could not but produce a corresponding effect
on our versification, and lines of ten syllables would insensibly
be written instead of lines of twelve or fourteen....
[Here follow some instances from Manning's, or Robert of
Brunne’s, continuation of Langtoft’s Chronicle, of the mixture
of the Alexandrine with verses of ten syllables.]
. . . . . . . . ..
[p.clx] Manning's use of the Decasyllabic verse, therefore, was
partial and accidental. The case was otherwise with Chaucer.
He used it uniformly, and upon system. This admits of
no doubt. I am not aware that a single instance of the
Alexandrine verse occurs in all Chaucer's works; for I fully
agree with Mr. Tyrwhitt that the Tale of Gamelyn was not
written by Chaucer.
[p. clxi] To give the reader a clear notion of what I conceive to have
been Chaucer's system of versification, I will transcribe the
opening lines of the Canterbury Tales, marking as well the
caesura in the middle of each verse as the pause at the end,
and also the strongly accented syllables, to shew in what
manner rhythmical Decasyllabic verses were, I apprehend,
recited.
Whēn thăt Aprìl ǁ with hĭs shōurĕs sòote |
Thĕ droūght ŏf Màrch ǁ hăd piērcĕd tŏ thĕ ròote |
And bāthĕd ĕvĕry vèin || ĭn sūch lĭquòur |
Of whīch vīrtùe || ĕngēndĕrĕd īs thĕ flòur |
[&c., &c.]
. . . . . . . . . .
That I may not be thought to assume too much in this
point without proof, I will adduce some reasons why I
consider Chaucer’s verses, though Decasyllabic, to have been
rhythmical, and not metrical.
First, because a large proportion of them cannot be read as
Iambic Decasyllables, without doing the utmost violence to
our language; all which verses are harmonious as verses of
cadence, if read with the cæsura rhythmically. And further,
because all those verses might easily by a slight transposition
have been made pure Iambic Decasyllables, had Chaucer either
known that mode of versification, or intended to have adopted
it: as in the following instance.
[p. clxii]
In her is high beauty withouten pride.
Cant. Tales. 4522.
Unless this line be read rhythmically, it has no principle of
harmony at all; but when so read, it has all the harmony that
sort of versification aspires to.
In hèr ĭs hìgh bĕautè || wĭthòutĕn prīde.
Had the Iambic Decasyllabic measure been intended, the
line with the transposition of a single word, might have been
made a perfect Iambic Decasyllable. We cannot suppose this
would have escaped Chaucer's notice.
In her high beauty is, withouten pride.
The above observations apply to a large number of lines
of a similar construction, occurring in almost every page of
Chaucer's works.
verses seems to me wholly inconsistent with the notion of a
Again; the incessant recurrence of defective and redundant
regular system of metrical versification, but not so with
rhythmical versification....
. . . . . . . . . .
Another, and I conceive a conclusive reason for believing
Chaucer’s verses to have been rhythmical verses, or verses of
cadence, may be drawn from the Manuscripts themselves in
which his poems are preserved. [Nott here goes on to
show that in all the MSS. either the cæsura, or the pause at
the end of the line is marked, and that sometimes both are
carefully marked, and that all the MSS. agree in fixing the
cæsura in every line, with hardly any variation, at the same
place; pointing to the fact that Chaucer not only meant his
verses to be rhythmical, but did all he could to settle what
their rhythm should be.]
. . . . . . . . . .
Sect. VIII. Of the nature and importance of Poetic Orna¬
ment, and of the defects of our early English Poets in Point
of Poetic Diction...
p. clxxxviii] Chaucer did much towards refining our poetic diction,
but he left it indefinite: and therefore open to subsequent
innovation and experiment. Indeed he was not consistent in
the use of one uniform style. In his Canterbury Tales what
he seems to have particularly aimed at was simplicity of con¬
struction and a not over-curious selection of words. By these
means he obtained a sort of natural dignity, and simple
elegance of style which rose often into sublimity, and enabled
him to present his thoughts in a manner singularly clear and
distinct. In his Troilus and Cressida, which is evidently
his most laboured composition, he aimed at something like
involution, and affected a greater nicety of terms.
[p. cxcii] Another defect in Chaucer, and in all our early poets, was
. . . . . . . . . .
the little attention paid by them to their system of Rhyming.
[p. cxciii] ... We find him [Chaucer] constantly admitting double
rhymes, which in grave and heroic subjects cannot be allowed,
as they carry with them an air of lightness inconsistent with
the dignity of heroic composition. He rhymed also not only
on feeble words, but on such as in themselves were mean and
trivial. The following rhymes occur in the Knights' Tales,
[sic] one of his most elevated pieces: us, after, shall, ah, thus,
her, other, pan, merry, ladle, cradle, shirt. His rhymes are
likewise often unpleasing by being formed of words, either
purely French, or of English words distorted, it should seem
arbitrarily, to rhyme with them, by being made to bear a
strong and heavy accent on the last syllable....I know
that this evil prevailed before Chaucer’s time, and I am will¬
ing to believe he did something to correct it. Still we find
him rhyming on the following words, semblaùnt, variaùnt,
plesaùnce, chevisaùnce, [&c., &c.]...
. . . . . . . . . .
Sect. XIII. Of the vague and diffuse Style used by our
[p. ccxxxv] [Remarks on the diffuseness and tautology of the early
early Poets....
poets, and an example of this is given from Chaucer, Com¬
plaint of Mars, fol. ccclxx, ed. 1532, beginning:
. . . . . . . . . . .
It seemeth Love hath to lovers enmity.]
[p. ccxli, [Nott says our early poets often debased fine passages
note a.]
by the introduction of mean circumstances, or trivial and
ignoble words, and as an example of this, he says:]
In Chaucer's complaint of Mars and Venus, we find this
very spirited description of Mars arming himself.
He throweth on his helm of hugie weight,
[p. ccxlii] His mighty spear, as he was wont to fight
And girt him with his sword; and in his hand
He shaketh so, that it almost to-wonn'd.
Thus far all is general and beautiful: but Chaucer cannot
forbear adding a circumstance which proves he had a Man at
Arms of the 14th century in his imagination.
Full heavy was he to walken over lond.
[p. ccxlii] Sect. XV. Of the want of skill in all our early Poets
in translating and imitating other writers, and Surrey's
excellence in this particular.
. . . . . . . . . .
Chaucer was incomparably the best and noblest of all our
early writers. Yet even Chaucer was unacquainted with the art
of imitating or translating with spirit and originality. [Here
follow several examples of translated passages:
(1) Troilus, Bk. ii, v. 1030, beginning:
For though the best// harper upon live
Would on the best// sowned joly harp...
which lines, says Dr. Nott, are 'an imperfect imitation of
two passages from Horace' in which Chaucer comprehends
his author's meaning, and applies it to his subject with
considerable skill; but we look in vain for the point and
[p. ccxliii] (2) Translation from Petrarch’s Sonnet 102, in Troil. and
terseness of the original.
Cress., Bk. i, ed. 1532:
If no love is, oh God! // what feel I so, &c.
in which the words are so ill chosen where the version is close;
and where it is paraphrastic the circumstances added are
selected with so little taste, and expressed with so little
elegance, that the spirit of the original is lost.]
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. ccxliv] A still more striking proof of Chaucer's want of taste in
translation occurs in his Canterbury Tales, where he attempts
a version of Dante's famous story of Ugolino.... With what
prosaical tameness and meanness of circumstance does he
paraphrase the... lines, in which Ugolino describes how
his suspicion was excited as to the fate which awaited his
unfortunate family and himself.
Sect. XVI. Of the further improvements made by Surrey
in our Poetry...
[p. ccxlvii] All our poets previous to Surrey wrote as if no other
manners, ideas, or modes of life ever had existed, or ever
could exist than those with which they themselves were
conversant. . . .
[p. ccxlix] That limited taste... pervaded the whole of Chaucer's
Knight's Tale. Who must not feel the first principles of good
taste violated, when he is told that Dan Arcite was a 'lusty
bachelor,' chamberlain and squire principal to Duke Theseus;
that the said Duke found Arcite and Palamon in the woods
when he went thither himself 'amaying;' and that he
learnt Arcite's passion by hearing him sing a Roundel in praise
of love, and talk of purgatory?
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. ccl] The same confusion arising from an absurd use of particular
instead of general ideas and sentiments in points of feeling,
reigns throughout the whole of the Troilus and Cressida.
Indeed were the names of the personages altered, that poem
would not only become a tale of chivalry, but would gain
beauty as well as propriety by the change.
. . . . . . . . .
[p. cclvi] How much inferior, on this account [i. e. incongruity and
confusion of ideas] is Palamon and Arcite, one of Chaucer's
most finished works, to his Squire's Tale, which even in
its imperfect state remains the most vigorous effort of his
fancy. The reason of the inferiority is this. In the Squire's
Tale every thing is of a piece; the subject, the figures, the
ideas, the machinery, are all purely Gothic, with a certain
mixture of eastern imagery which gave, at the time of the
Crusades, a peculiar colouring to our northern romances...
But in the Knight's Tale we are sensible at every page that
the principal rules of good taste are violated; we feel the
absurdity of combining manners of periods so remote from
each other as the time of Theseus, and the reign of Edward
the Third; and even when we are most pleased we tremble
lest some strange incongruity should arise, to destroy the
effect of all that has preceeded.
. . . . . . . . . .
[p. ccxix] Sect. XX. Of the authors whom Surrey studied; of
Chaucer, Dante...
As for Chaucer his name is in every one's mouth; and is
always mentioned with praise. Nor could it well be otherwise.
We could not but speak with respect of the author whom
Spencer had declared to have been his poetic father, whom so
many subsequent writers had called 'the Well-head of English
undefiled,' and whom Dryden had commended in terms of filial
reverence. Still Chaucer is little read, and his merits are
imperfectly understood. He was a poet of as large and com¬
prehensive a mind as almost any whom this, or any other
country can boast. He was a great and an universal scholar.
This praise cannot be denied to him who was master of all the
learning of his times. His memory was stored with images
collected from all the sources of information then open to
enquiry... Had the Squire's Tale been finished... I am
persuaded that Chaucer would have left us the noblest
specimen of romantic imagination to be found within the
compass of modern literature. But Chaucer's chief merit
consists in his knowledge of human nature and in his
power of delineating character. In humorous and satiric
portraits, we meet with the nicest touches of discrimination
between vice and foible that can well be imagined: and
in his heroic characters we find him constantly preserving
gradations of excellence even in those points where there is a
general resemblance. The Knight and the Squire, Palamon
[p. and Arcite, Demetrius of Inde, and Lycurgus of Thrace, are
cclxx]
all brave and enterprising; but each of them is an individual
of himself. Courage is the one common attribute of all.
But there are the same shades of difference in the courage of
each that Homer has been so often admired for preserving
in the characters of Ulysses and Antilochus; Diomed and
Patroclus; Ajax and Achilles. I know of no writer in
modern times, Shakespeare excepted, who can be compared
with Chaucer for masterly discrimination of character.
[Vol. ii, ... For though it is evident that he [Wyatt] had read
p. cliii]
Chaucer, and admired him, his imitations are neither frequent,
nor of a description to make us suppose that he took him as
his master, or considered him to be 'the well-head of English
undefiled.'