1817. Scott, Sir Walter. Ivanhoe, 1819 [references to 2nd edn., 1820],
pp. xix-xx, Dedicatory Epistle [dated 1817], 20, 130, 157, 174,
234, headings to chapters ii, viii, ix, x and xii, (or rather xiii,
ch. x being duplicated and the subsequent numbers wrong in the
early edns.). (Border Edition, ed. Andrew Lang, 1893, vol. i,
pp. xlviii-ix, 14, 86, 104, 159.)
Dedicatory Epistle.
[p. xiviii] He who first opens Chaucer, or any other ancient poet,
is so much struck with the obsolete spelling, multiplied conson¬
ants, and antiquated appearance of the language, that he is
apt to lay the work down in despair, as encrusted too deep
with the rust of antiquity, to permit his judging of its merits
or tasting its beauties. But if some intelligent and accom¬
[p. xlix] plished friend points out to him, that the difficulties by which
he is startled are more in appearance than reality, if, by read¬
ing aloud to him, or by reducing the ordinary words to the
modern orthography, he satisfies his proselyte that only about
one-tenth part of the words employed are in fact obsolete, the
novice may be easily persuaded to approach the “well of
English undefiled," with the certainty that a slender degree of
patience will enable him to enjoy both the humour and the
pathos with which old Geoffrey delighted the age of Cressy
and of Poictiers.
[p. 14] [Chapter ii is headed with a quotation from the Prologue,
"A Monk ther was, a fayre for the maistrie,” &c. (ll. 165¬
172). The description of the Monk in chapter ii is based
on Chaucer:] He was obviously an ecclesiastic of high
rank... In defiance of conventual rules... the sleeves
of this dignitary were lined and turned up with rich furs; his
mantle secured at the throat with a golden clasp.  ...
This worthy churchman rode upon a well-fed ambling
mule, whose furniture was highly decorated, and whose bridle,
according to the fashion of the day, was ornamented with
silver bells. In his seat he had nothing of the awkwardness
of the Convent, but displayed the easy and habitual grace of a
well-trained horseman. [Cf. Prologue, ll. 165-172; 193-196.]
[Chapters viii and ix are headed by quotations from
Dryden’s Palamon and Arcite; chapter x from the Flower and
the Leaf (modernized); chapter xiii from the Knightes Tale,
ll. 1741-1752, "The heralds left their pricking up and
down,” &c.]