1893. Pollard, Alfred William. Chaucer, [one of the] Literature
Primers, edited by J. R. Green.
[Dr. Furnivall was originally invited to write the Primer
on Chaucer for this series: see above, Green, 1877. In the
little book, as finally written by Mr. Pollard, the chapters
are: Introduction; Chaucer, the King’s Servant; Chaucer,
the Student; The Contents and Order of Chaucer's Writings
(also the Canon); Poems of Chaucer's First Period; Poems
of Chaucer's Second Period—Chaucer at work on Italian
Models; The Canterbury Tales; Later Minor Poems—Chaucer's
rank as a Poet (a comparison with Shakespeare); Appendix—
Chaucer's Metre and Versification—Spurious and Doubtful
Works. The author, while summarising the best knowledge,
offers throughout much fresh and suggestive criticism.]
[p. 75] It was by service in the King’s Court, on diplomatic
missions, and at the Custom House, that a living had to be
earned and a substantial position won; and it is to these
objects, trivial in his case as we may now think them, that
[p. 76] Chaucer appears to have devoted the best years of his life. ...
If Shakspere had died in his thirtieth year he would have
been remembered as a botcher of a few poor plays, and the
author of Venus and Adonis, the Midsummer Night's Dream,
and Richard III. Where Shakspere botched Chaucer trans¬
lated, and the charm of a few hundred lines in the Death of
Blaunche and the pathos of the stories of Grisilde and Con¬
stance are the chief titles to remembrance of all the work he
did on the younger side of forty. From the very first he is
distinguished from his contemporaries by the music of his
verse; but the humour, the insight into character, the know¬
ledge of life, the entire mastery of words, the essential
qualities, that is, which we now connect with his name, all
came to Chaucer exceptionally late.
[p. 116] The portraits [in the Prologue], we should note, are all
such as one traveller might draw of another. There is no
attempt to show that the best of the pilgrims had their weak
points, and the worst their good ones. For the best Chaucer
has hearty admiration, for the worst a boundless tolerance,
which yet only thinly cloaks the keenest satire. One and
all he views from his holiday standpoint, building up his
descriptions with such notes as he would naturally gather
as he rode along with them on his pilgrimage—notes of dress,
of speech, of manner, of their talk about themselves and
their doings, until we can see his fellow-pilgrims as clearly
as if we too had mounted our rouncies and ridden along
with them.