1887. Morris. William. Feudal England, [in] The Commonweal,
nos. 84-87. [Reprinted, with slight alterations (as Lecture 3), in
Signs of Change, 1887, pp. 73-5.]
[No.87,
[The central period of the Middle Ages in England] has a
p. 282]
literature of its own too, somewhat akin to its art, yet inferior
to it, and lacking its unity, since there is a double stream
in it. On the one hand the Court poet, the Gentleman,
Chaucer, with his Italianizing metres, and his formal recog¬
nition ot the classical stories; on which, indeed, he builds a
superstructure of the quaintest and most unadulterated
mediævalism, as gay and bright as the architecture which
his eyes beheld and his pen pictured for us, so clear, defined
and elegant; a sunny world even amidst its violence and
passing troubles, like those of a happy child, the worst of
them are amusement rather than a grief to the onlookers;
a world that scarcely needed hope in its eager life of adventure
and love, amidst the sunlit blossoming meadows, and green
woods and white begilded manor-houses. A kindly and
human muse is Chaucer’s, nevertheless, interested in and
amused by all life, but of her very nature devoid of strong
aspirations for the future; and that all the more, since,
though the strong devotion and fierce piety ot the ruder Middle
Ages had by this time waned, and the Church was more often
lightly mocked than either feared or loved, still the habit
ot looking on this life as part of another yet remained: the
world is fair and full of adventure; kind men and true and
noble are in it to make one happy; fools also to laugh at, and
rascals to be resisted, yet not wholly condemned; and when
this world is over we shall still go on living in another which
is a part of this. Of this picture, note all and be as merry
as you may, never forgetting that you are alive and that it
is good to live.
That is the spirit of Chaucer's poetry; but alongside of it
existed yet the ballad poetry of the people ... [and what]
you may call Lollard poetry, the great example of which is
William Langland’s "Piers Plowman." It is no bad cor¬
rective to Chaucer, and in form at least belongs wholly to the
popular side.
[For Skeat see below, 1888.]