1894-97. The Complete Works of Geoffrey Chaucer. Edited ...
by ... W. W. Skeat, 7 vols.
[The chief contents are: Vol. I, Life of Chaucer, etc.;
Romaunt of the Rose and Minor Poems, with introductions
and notes. (See also vol. iv below, for additions to Minor
Poems.)
Vol. II: Boethius and Troilus, with introductions and
notes.
Vol. III: House of Fame; Legend of Good Women;
Astrolabe, with introductions and notes. An Account of the
Sources of the Canterbury Tales.
Vol. IV: The Canterbury Tales, in groups A to I, with
the Tale of Gamelyn as an appendix; Introduction on the
MSS. and the plan of the Tales adopted. The Introduction
contains also three Minor Poems additional to those in vol. i.
Vol. V: Notes to the Canterbury Tales, with an Intro¬
duction on the Chaucer Canon; the earlier editions; the
Text of the Canterbury Tales; Chaucer's scansion, accentu¬
ation and pronunciation; with rules for reading and a note on
modernised spelling.
Vol. VI: General Introduction, discussing the texts of the
various pieces; the editor’s obligations to others; the dialect
of Chaucer; his Kenticisms; pronunciation; scansion and
accents; open and close o and e, etc.; rime; assonances; final
y and ye; metres and forms of verse; analysis of Chaucer's
language and grammar; versification; his authorities. Glos¬
saries, indices, etc.
Vol. VII (Supplementary Volume), Chaucerian and other
Pieces, contains:
Introduction on the (selected) apocryphal pieces, generally
and individually, and the texts as follows, concluding with
indices, etc.:
I. Testament of Love (Usk).
II. Plowman’s Tale.
III. Jack Upland.
IV. Gower's Praise of Peace.
V. Hoccleve’s Letter of Cupid.
VI. To the Kinge's most noble Grace
To the Lordes and Knightes of the Hoccleve.
Garter
VII. Scogan’s Moral Ballade.
VIII. Lydgate's Complaint of the Black Knight.
IX. Lydgate’s Flour of Curtesye.
X. Lydgate’s Balade in Commendation of our Lady.
XI. To my Soverain Lady (Lydgate).
XII. Ballad of Good Counsel (Lydgate).
XIII. Beware of Doubleness (Lydgate).
XIV. Balade Warning Men to Beware of Deceitful
Women (Lydgate).
XV. Three Sayings (Lydgate).
XVI. Ros's La Belle Dame sans Mercy.
XVII. Henryson’s Testament of Cressid.
XVIII. Clanvowe’s Cuckoo and Nightingale.
XIX. Envoy to Alison.
XX. Flower and Leaf.
XXI. Assembly of Ladies.
XXII. Goodly Balade (Lydgate).
XXIII. Go Forth, King (Lydgate).
XXIV. Court of Love.
XXV. A Virelai.
XXVI. Prosperity (John Walton).
XXVII. Leaulte vault Richesse.
XXVIII. Sayings printed by Caxton.
XXIX. Balade in Praise of Chaucer.
[vol. vi. In the first place, my endeavour has been to produce a
p. ix]
thoroughly sound text, founded solely on the best MSS. and
the earliest prints, which shall satisfy at once the requirements
of the student of language and the reader who delights in
poetry. In the interest of both, it is highly desirable that
Chaucer’s genuine works should be kept apart from those
which were recklessly associated with them in the early
editions, and even in modern editions have been but imper¬
fectly suppressed. It was also desirable, or rather absolutely
necessary, that the recent advances in our knowledge of middle-
English grammar and phonetics should be rightly utilized,
and that no verbal form should be allowed to appear which
would have been unacceptable to a good scribe of the
fourteenth century.
I have also provided a large body of illustrative notes, many
of them gathered from the works of my predecessors, but
enlarged by illustrations due to my own reading during a long
course of years, and by many others due to the labours of the
[p. x] most recent critics. The number of allusions that have been
traced to their origin during the past fifteen years is consider¬
able; and much additional light has thus been thrown upon
Chaucer's method of treating his originals. ...
[p. xviii] As regards the texts, my chief debt is to the Chaucer
Society, which means, practically, Dr. Furnivall, through
whose zeal and energy so many splendid and accurate prints of
the MSS. have been produced, thus rendering the actual read¬
ings and spellings of the scribes accessible to students in all
countries. It is obvious that, but for such work, no edition of
Chaucer could have been attempted without an enormous
increase of labour and a prodigal expenditure of time.