1883. Coote, Henry Charles. Chaucer's Ten-Syllable Verse, [in] The
Antiquary, July 1883, vol. viii, pp. 5-8.
[p. 5] Chaucer's Troilus was not only the first heroic poem and
the first real display of poetic genius in the language of
mediæval England, but was the starting-point and departure
from which English metre took its best and still prevailing
form. ...
[p. 7] At the very threshold of his task [that of rendering the
Filostrato into English] he had a problem to solve. ...
There was no English verse at all fit for the transfer of the
Italian. He must accordingly invent a new one. ...
He knew of two metres only, always excepting those used for
ballads and such like, which were of course out of the question
here. Of these two metres, one was too short as the other was
too long for his taste. I mean, of course, the eight-syllabled
distichs of himself and Gower, and the popular twelve syllable
[p. 8] verse such as is exhibited in the rough tale of Gamelin. ...
He therefore elected to invent for the nonce an entirely new
metre of his own, and to apply it to his new task. There was
a mean between eight and twelve, viz. ten. He accordingly
invented a verse of ten syllables with varying and appropriate
cæsuræ; and utilized his new invention by translating the
Filostrato into it; and posterity ratified his choice by adopting
it as the only verse to be employed upon themes either great
or graceful. ...
The consequences of this invention of the ten-syllable metre
it is impossible to exaggerate or over-estimate. The obvious
outcome of it is simply this and no other: without it we
should have had no Shakespeare, Milton, Dryden, or Pope, in
the sense in which we now have these great masters. To
convince us of this, we have only to imagine Othello and
Hamlet, not as we now have them through the remote leader¬
ship of Chaucer in a verse framed upon his model, but told
either in the lilting measure of Calderon, or the drawling
Alexandrines of France. ... Of course Milton must have
been better than Cædmon, and Pope would have done his best
to surpass Butler even in his own light measure, but that is all.
From all this Chaucer saved English literature and the
English race. ...