1895. Ker, William Paton. The Poetry of Chaucer, [review of] The
Complete Works of Geoffrey Chaucer, edited by the Rev. Walter
W. Skeat, [in] The Quarterly Review, April, 1895, vol. clxxx,
pp. 521-48. [The greater part of this article, that which is more
directly concerned with Chaucer's poetry, i. e. pp. 534-47, is re¬
printed, with slight verbal changes and omissions, in Essays on
Medieval Literature, by W. P. Ker, 1905, pp. 76-100.]
[The importance of Skeat's edition. Its supreme merit is
that it has cleared the poems of Chaucer from blunders of
language and rhythm, which in former editions interrupted
the flow of the verse, pp. 521-2. Chaucer's art and versi¬
fication, with especial reference to Dryden’s criticism, pp.
522-3.]
[p. 522] With regard to some of the strongest parts of Chaucer's
poetry, no later writer has been able to add anything essenti¬
ally new to the estimate given by Dryden. 'Here is God’s
plenty' is still the best criticism ever uttered on the“Canter¬
bury Tales.'
[There is some justification for Dryden’s censure of Chaucer's
verse, p. 523. Decay of metrical ability after Chaucer, and
Skeat's method in adopting readings, pp. 524-5. Examples
of Skeat’s emendations and readings, pp. 525-6. Account of
the contents of the volumes, with the comment that "the
Clarendon Press has done little to relieve the general aspect of
sobriety, much at variance with the demeanour of the contents,
and very unlike the appearance of the illuminated books from
which the poems are copied," pp. 526-7. Complaint of the over¬
insistence on Dr. Furnivall’s classification of the groups of the
Canterbury Tales, pp. 527-8. On Skeat’s introductions, his
metrical symbols, his remarks on Chaucer’s vowels and Kentish
forms and knowledge of Old French verse—any possible flaws
in which do not prejudice his handling of the texts, pp. 528-
31. The texts of the Romaunt, Troylus and the Legende
acknowledged and praised, p. 532. Skeat’s abstention from
literary criticism, and reference of the reader to Lowell’s essay,
deprecated, p. 533. Comparison of Chaucer and Dante in their
use of mediæval habit and fashion, pp. 534-5. Historical
commentary on Chaucer inevitable and useful, pp. 535-6.
On Skeat's statement of the debt in the Hous of Fame
to Dante, and the general independence of Chaucer's poem,
p. 537. How much of Chaucer's genius can be seen outside
the Canterbury Tales, pp. 537-8.]
[p. 538] It is difficult to speak moderately of Chaucer's "Troilus."
It is the first great modern book in that kind where the most
characteristic modern triumphs of the literary art have been
won; in the kind to which belong the great books of Cer¬
vantes, of Fielding, and of their later pupils—that form of
story which is not restricted in its matter in any way, but is
capable of taking in comprehensively all or any part of the
aspects and humours of life. No other mediæval poem is rich
and full in the same way as "Troilus" is full of varieties of
character and mood. It is a tragic novel, and it is also strong
enough to pass the scrutiny of that Comic Muse who detects
the impostures of inflated heroic and romantic poetry. More
than this, it has the effective aid of the Comic Muse in that
alliance of tragedy and comedy which makes an end of all
the old distinctions and limitations of narrative and drama.
and proportion of Troilus, pp. 539-40. The Knightes Tale
[Troilus and the Filostrato, pp. 538-9. The dignity, beauty
and the Teseide, pp. 540-1. Chaucer's different handling of
the Troilus and Knightes Tale themes, pp. 541-3. Chaucer's
changes of handling throughout his works, p. 543. The
House of Fame an indulgence in mediæval vanities, pp. 544-5.
Contradictions and problems of the Canterbury Tales, pp.
544-7.]