1891. Lounsbury, Thomas Raynsford. Studies in Chaucer: His Life
and Writings. In three volumes, New York, 1891. [The London
issue, 1892, is in B. M.].
[The eight chapters or "monographs" which make up the
book are as follows:]
Vol. I. Chapter I.— The Life of Chaucer.
" Chapter II.—The Chaucer Legend.
" Chapter III.—The Text of Chaucer.
Vol. I. Chapter IV.—The Writings of Chaucer.
Vol. II. Chapter IV. (continued).—The Romance of the Rose.
" Chapter V.—The Learning of Chaucer.
" Chapter VI.—The Relations of Chaucer to the English
Language and to the Religion of his
Time.
Vol. III. Chapter VII.—Chaucer in Literary History.
" Chapter VIII.—Chaucer as a Literary Artist.
" Appendix.
[Vol. iii, I have sought to show that Chaucer was not only a great
p. 439]
artist, but that he became so at the cost of time and labour;
that in him, standing at the fountain-head of English litera¬
ture, the critical spirit was as highly developed as the creative.
... If we need further confirmation, we can find it in one
marked change that took place in his literary methods. In
his earlier work he introduces constantly characters that are
merely personifications of qualities or acts or sentiments.
In so doing he followed the practice of his immediate pre¬
decessors. As he advanced in knowledge and taste he shook
himself free from the trammels of this temporary fashion. He
abandoned almost entirely the field of abstractions in which
the men of his time delighted, and in which his contemporary
Langland was contented to remain. For the shadowy beings
who dwell in the land of types he substituted living men and
women; for the allegorical representations of feelings and
beliefs, the direct outpourings of passion. Changes of method
such as these are not the result of freak or accident. Chaucer,
accordingly, must stand or fall not merely by our opinion of
what he did, but by our knowledge that what he did was done
consciously. ...
It is impossible to take final leave of the poet without some
notice of what is on the whole the most pronounced character¬
[p. 441] istic of his style. This is the uniformly low level upon which
he moves. There is no other author in our tongue who has
clung so closely and so persistently to the language of common
life. Such a characteristic appealed strongly to the men who
led the revolt against the artificial diction that prevailed in
the poetry of the last century. It attracted in particular the
attention of Wordsworth. The course of his predecessor he
cited as an authority for the one which he himself adopted. ...
There have been many men of genius who have been able to
say grand things grandly. To the fewest of the few is re¬
served the achievement of the far harder task of discoursing
of mean things without discoursing meanly; of recounting the
prosaic events of life without becoming prosaic one's self; of nar¬
rating them in the plainest terms, and yet investing them with a
poetic charm. It is in the power of genius only to accomplish
this at all; but it is by no means in the power of all genius.
[p. 442] It is because he stayed so persistently on these low levels
that Chaucer was enabled to combine with apparent ease
characteristics and methods that are often deemed incompatible.
His words are the more effective because their very simplicity
makes upon the mind the impression of understatement. The
imagination of the reader fills in and exaggerates the details
which have been left half-told. It is owing to this restraint
of expression that whatever he says is not only at all times
and in all places free from literary vulgarity, it never loses the
dignity that belongs, as well in letters as in life, to consum¬
mate high-breeding. There is an exquisite urbanity in his
manner which gives it attractiveness as pervasive and yet as
indefinable as that which the subtle evanescent flavour of arch
allusion imparts to his matter. I do not mean by this to
convey the idea that Chaucer abounds in ornate and brilliant
passages, or that he is constantly saying remarkable things in
a remarkable way. It is simply that in dealing with the
common he is never common-place. ... As a further result
of this absolute naturalness, he is enabled to pass from the
gravest to the lightest topics without giving the reader the
[p. 443] slightest sensation of shock. ... His freedom, indeed, verges
at times upon audacity. In the Knight's tale, for illustration,
following close upon the high-wrought description of the great
tournament comes the recital of the methods taken by the
physicians to save the life of the victor in the struggle. The
failure they meet with is told in the simplest terms. Their
efforts were fruitless because they received no help from nature.
Suddenly the poet interposes his own comment on the useless¬
ness, under such conditions, of the medical art in words like
these :—
"And certainly there nature will not wirche
Farewell, physic! Go! bear the man to church!"
With this quaint expression of personal opinion, he passes at
once to the pathetic parting-scene between the dying lover
and the woman for whom he is about to die. Yet these rapid
transitions do not produce upon the mind any effect of inap¬
propriateness or incongruity. Tears and laughter stand side
by side in Chaucer's verse as they do in life ...
[p. 444] I am not claiming for Chaucer that he is one of the few
supremest poets of the race. His station is near them, but he
is not of them. Yet, whatever may be the rank we accord
him among the writers of the world’s chief literatures, the
position he holds in his own literature is one that can no
longer be shaken by criticism or disturbed by denial. ...To
one alone among the writers of our own literature is he
inferior. Nor even by him has he been surpassed in every
way. There are characteristics in which he has no superior,
and, it may be right to add, in which he has no equal. ...
There is one particular in wwhich his merits in reference to the
literature are transcendent. He overcame its natural tendencies
to a dull seriousness which could sometimes be wrought into
vigorous invective, but had little power to fuse the spiritual
element of poetry with the purely intellectual. Into the stolid
English nature, which may be earnest, but evinces an almost
irresistible inclination towards heaviness, he brought a light¬
ness, a grace, a delicacy of fancy, a refined sportiveness even
upon the most unrefined themes which had never been known
[p. 445] before save on the most infinitesimal scale, and has not been
known too much since.
Nor is this the only distinctive characteristic in which
Chaucer excels. There is no other English author so absolutely
free, not merely from effort, but from the remotest suggestion
of effort. Shakspeare mounts far higher; yet with him
there are times when we seem to hear the flapping of the
wings, to be vaguely conscious that he is lashing his imagina¬
tion to put forth increased exertions. But in Chaucer no
slightest trace of strain is to be detected. As on the lower levels
the line never labours, so on the higher he never makes the
impression that he is trying to make an impression. It is the
absolute ease with which he rises that often prevents our per¬
ceiving how rapidly he has risen. ... Nor is it alone for the
naturalness and ease which result from this union of strength
and simplicity that the greatest of his successors have delighted
to honour the poet. Full as willingly have they paid homage
to the qualities of character displayed in his works as to those
of intellect; in perfect serenity of spirit as well as in perfect
sanity of view; in the large-hearted toleration which could
[p. 446] not speak bitterly even of the vicious; in the gracious worldli¬
ness which never hardened into the callousness of insensibility;
in the manly tenderness which never degenerated into senti¬
mentality; in the repose of conscious strength which never
wearied itself or worried itself in striving for effect;—in all
these characteristics the royal line of English poets has never
refused to acknowledge the supremacy of him whom it
recognizes as its founder.