1598. Speght, Thomas. The Workes of our Antient and lerned English
Poet, Geffrey Chaucer. [Additional extracts.]
[Sign. e. iiii.] Arguments to every Tale and Booke. [48 in all.]
The Argument to the Prologues–
The Authour in these Prologues to his Canterbury Tales,
doth describe the reporters thereof for two causes : first, that
the Reader seeing the qualitie of the person, may iudge of his
speech accordingly : wherein Chaucer hath most excellently
kept that decorum, which Horace requireth in that behalfe.
Secondly to shew, how that euen in our language, that may
be perfourmed for descriptions, which the Greeke and Latin
Poets in their tongues haue done at large. And surely this
Poet in the iudgement of the best learned, is not inferiour to
any of them in his descriptions, whether they be of persons,
times, or places. Vnder the Pilgrimes, being a certaine
number, and all of differing trades, he comprehendeth all
the people of the land, and the nature and disposition of
them in those daies; namely, giuen to deuotion rather of
custome than of zeale. In the Tales is shewed the state
of the Church, the Court, and Countrey, with such Arte and
cunning, that although none could deny himselfe to be
touched, yet none durst complaine that he was wronged.
For the man being of greater learning then the most, and
backed by the best in the land, was rather admired and
feared, then any way disgraced. Whoso shall read these
his works without preiudice, shall find that he was a man of
rare conceit and of great reading.
. . . . . . . . . .
[Sign. c. v.]
The Plowman's Tale.
A complaint against the pride and couetousnesse of the
cleargie: made no doubt by Chaucer with the rest of the
Tales. For I haue seene it in written hand in Iohn Stowes
Library in a booke of such antiquity, as seemeth to haue
beene written neare to Chaucers time.
[Sign c. v b.]
The Legend of Good Women.
For that some Ladies in the Court tooke offence at Chaucers
large speeches against the vntruth of women, the Queene
enioyned him to compile this booke in the commendation of
sundry maydens and wiues, who shewed themselues faithfull
to faithlesse men.
[In the second edn. of Speght’s Chaucer, 1602, these
‘Arguments' were removed from their place immediately
after the ‘Life,' and placed at the beginnings of the
respective works.]