1562. Brooke, or Broke, Arthur. Influence of Chauœer in The
Tragicall Historye of Romeus and Iuliet, written first in Italian by
Bandell, and nowe in Englishe by Ar. Br. [Brooke’s poem was
one of the main sources of Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet. For
a fuller account of Brooke’s debt to Chaucer, see Romeus and Juliet,
‘Shakespeare Classics,’ ed. by J. J. Munro, 1908. Mr. Munro has
kindly supplied the following notes:]
[Brooke's debt is of two kinds : (a) where he amplifies a
suggestion in his original (Boaistuau) with the help of
Chaucer's Troilus; and (b) where he derives a suggestion
from Chaucer only.]
(a) Boaistuau (ed. 1559), p. 43: l’amour qu’il portoit à sa
premiere damoiselle demoura vaincu par ce nouueau feu.
Brooke, ll. 207-9:1
And as out of a planke a nayle a nayle doth driue:
So nouell loue out of the minde the auncient loue doth riue
This sodain kindled fyre in time is wox so great : etc.
Troilus & Criseyde, iv, 415:
The newe love out chaceth ofte the olde.
Troilus & Criseyde, iv, 422:
The newe love, labour or other wo,
Or elles selde seinge of a wight,
Don olde affectiouns alle over-go. 2
Boaistuau, p. 45 b: ie suis vostre, estāt preste & diposée
de vous obeyr en tout ce que l’honneur pourra souffrir.
1 The line-references to Brooke are to the 'fourteeners,' each of which
is printed as two lines in the original edition.
a  From Boccaccio’s Filostrato, but originally from Ovid : Successore
novo vincitur omnis amor. (Remed. Amor. 462.) Brooke’s lines were
copied by Shakespere in Two Gentlemen of Verona, Romeo, and Julius
Cæsar.
Brooke, l. 314:
(My honor saued) prest tobay [i. e. to obey] your will, while
life endures.
Troil. iii, 480:
Myn honour sauf, please him fro day to day;
.. . but elles wol I fonde,
Troil. iii, 159:
she...
‘Myn honour sauf,' I wol wel trewely, etc.
.. sayde him softely,
[Juliet in Brooke, and Criseyde in Troilus, both make
frequent insistence that their lovers' conduct must be
honorable.]
Boaistuau, p. 52: de sorte que s’ils eussent peu com¬
mander au ciel comme Iosué fist au soleil, etc.
Brooke, l. 824 :
So that I deeme if they might haue (as of Alcume [sic for
Alcmene we heare)
The sunne bond to theyr will; etc.
Troil. iii, 1427-8:
O right, allas! why niltow over us hove
As longe as whanne Almena lay by Jove? 1
[This under similar circumstances in both poems: i.e. in
connexion with the lovers' nocturnal meeting.]
(b) Brooke, l. 332:
Of both the ylles to choose the lesse,
I wene the choyse were harde.
Troil. ii, 470:
Of harmes two, the lesse is for to chese.
Brooke, l. 393:
[Juliet] A thousand stories more, to teache me to beware,
In Boccace and in Ouids bookes too playnely written are.
Troil. iii, 297:
[Criseyde] A thousand olde stories thee alegge
Of women lost, through fals and foles bost.
Laurence or Pandare, are both like the patient waiting for
[Romeus and Troilus, while waiting for the help of
the leech’s salve.]
Brooke, l. 613:
The wounded man that now doth dedly paines endure:
Scarce pacient tarieth whilst his leech doth make the salue
So Romeus, etc.
to cure.
Troil. i, 1086:
Now lat us stinte of Troilus a stounde,
That fareth lyk a man that hurt is sore,
And is somdel of akinge of his wounde
Y-lissed wel, but heled no del more:
And, as an esy pacient, the lore
Abit of him that gooth aboute his cure;
And thus he dryveth forth his aventure.
[The first night of parting between the lovers.]
Brooke, l : 1537 :
But on his brest her hed doth ioylesse Iuliet lay,
And on her slender necke his chyn doth ruthfull Romeus
stay.
Troil. iv, 1150:
‘Help, Troilus !’ and ther-with-al hir face
Upon his brest she leyde, and loste speche.
[The two scenes throughout are very similar.]
[Brooke’s additions to the Romeo story.
These are not important so far as the story is concerned, but
they form the best cases of borrowing. In the now lost
earlier play (?) on Romeo which Brooke mentions and which
both Brooke and Shakspere appear to have used, there was a
scene at Laurence’s cell in which Romeo lamented. In
Brooke he becomes savage: this is taken from a similar
scene with Troilus just before the entry of Pandare, as the
references show.]
Brooke, l. 1291 :
These heauy tydinges heard, his golden lockes he tare:
And like a frantike man hath torne the garmentes that he
ware.
And as the smitten deere in brakes is waltring found :
So waltreth he, and with his brest doth beate the troden
grounde.
He rises eft, and strikes his head against the wals,
He falleth downe againe, and lowde for hasty death he cals.
Come spedy death (quoth he); etc.
Troil. iv, 239:
Right as the wilde bole biginneth springe
Now here, now there, y-dexted to the herte,
And of his deeth roseth in compleyninge,
Right so gan he aboute the chaumbre sterte,
Smyting his brest ay with his festes smerte;
His heed to the wal, his body to the grounde
Ful ofte he swepte, him-selven to confounde.
. . . . . . . . .
l. 250:
‘O deeth, allas! why niltow do me deye:’
Brooke, l. 1325:
Fyrst nature did he blame, the author of his lyfe,
In which his ioyes had been so scant, and sorowes aye so
ryfe:
The time and place of byrth, he fiersly did reproue,
He cryed out (with open mouth) against the starres aboue:
The fatall sisters three he said, had done him wrong; etc.
. . . . . . . . . .
l. 1335:
And then did he complaine on Venus cruel sonne.
. . . . . . . . . .
l. 1343:
On Fortune eke he raylde, he calde her deafe, and blynde
Vnconstant, fond, deceitfull, rashe, vnruthfull, and vnkynd.
And to him self he layd a great part of the falt:
For that he slewe, and was not slayne, in fighting with
Tibalt.
He blamed all the world, and all he did defye,
But Iuliet, for whom he liued for whom eke would he dye.
Troil. v, 204:
And there his sorwes that he spared hadde
He yaf an issue large, and ‘deeth !' he cryde;
And in his throwes frenetyk and madde
He cursed Iove, Appollo, and eek Cupyde,
He cursed Ceres, Bacus, and Cipryde,
His burthe, him-self, his fate, and eek nature,
And, save his lady, every creature.
[Laurence to Romeus.]
Brooke, l. 1353 :
Art thou quoth he a man? thy shape saith, so thou art :
Thy crying and they weping eyes, denote a woman’s hart.
[Pandare to Troilus.]
Troil. iii, 1098:
‘O theef, is this a mannes herte?’
And of he rente al to his bare sherte.
[Criseyde to Troilus.]
Troil. iii, 1126:
‘is this a mannes game?
What, Troilus! wol ye do thus, for shame?’
[The other innovation made by Brooke is Romeus’s sorrow
in his exile, copied from Troilus. Both Troilus and Romeus
sigh and weep at night; etc.]
Brooke, l. 1755 :
Eche night a thousand times he calleth for the day,
He thinketh Titans restles stedes of restives do stay;
Or that at length they haue some bayting place found out,
Or (gyded yll) haue lost theyr way and wandred farre about¬
Troil. v. 659 :
The day is more, and lenger every night,
Than they be wont to be, him thoughte tho;
And that the sonne wente his course unright
By lenger wey than it was wont to go;
And seyde  ‘y-wis, ne dredeth ever-mo,
The sonnes sone, Pheton, be on-lyve,
And that his fadres cart amis he dryve.
[It should be remembered that Troilus is in many respects
quite parallel to Romeo. In each story two lovers are secretly
betrothed and meet at night in the lady’s house. They
vacillate between joy and sorrow and are comforted and
helped by a philosophical friend. One of them is banished,
and they have a final night together and part at dawn. It
was at these points of contact that Brooke was able to
derive suggestions from Chaucer.]