1879. Ward, Sir Adolphus William. Chaucer (English Men of Letters
Series, ed. John Morley).
[Contents: Chap. I, Chaucer's Times; Chap. Il, Chaucer's
Life and Works; Chap. III, Characteristics of Chaucer and
of his Poetry; Chap. IV, Epilogue; Glossary.]
[p. 146] One very pleasing quality in Chaucer must have been his
modesty. In the course of his life this may have helped to
recommend him to patrons so many and so various, and to
make him the useful and trustworthy agent that he evidently
became for confidential missions abroad. ... To us, of course,
this quality of modesty in Chaucer makes itself principally
manifest in the opinion which he incidentally shows himself
to entertain concerning his own rank and claims as an author.
Herein, as in many other points, a contrast is noticeable
between him and the great Italian masters. ... Chaucer
again and again disclaims all boasts of perfection, or pre-
[p. 147] tensions to pre-eminence, as a poet. ... He acknowledges
as incontestable the superiority of the poets of classical
antiquity.
[p. 177] The vivacity and joyousness of Chaucer’s poetic tempera¬
ment ... show themselves in various other ways besides his
favourite manner of treating a favourite theme. They
enhance the spirit of his passages of dialogue, and add force
and freshness to his passages of description. They make
him amusingly impatient of epical lengths, abrupt in his
transitions, and anxious, with an anxiety more usually mani-
fested by readers than by writers, to come to the point, "to
the great effect," as he is wont to callit. ... And he uncon¬
sciously suggests a striking difference between himself and the
great Elizabethan epic poet who owes so much to him, when
he declines to make as long a tale of the chaff or of the straw
as of the corn, and to describe all the details of a marriage-
feast seriatim:
The fruit of every tale is for to say:
They eat and drink, and dance and sing and play. . . .
Most assuredly he can tell a story with admirable point and
[p. 178] precision, when he wishes to do so. Perhaps no better
example of his skill in this respect could be cited than the
Manciple’s Tale, with its rapid narrative, its major and
minor catastrophe, and its concise moral, ending thus:—
My son, beware, and be no author new
[and 3 following lines].
at the same time, his frequently recurring announcements
of his desire to be brief have the effect of making his narrative
appear to halt, and thus unfortunately defeat their own
purpose. An example of this may be found in the Knight's
Tale, a narrative poem of which, in contrast with its beauties,
a want of evenness is one of the chief defects. It is not
that the desire to suppress redundancies is a tendency de¬
serving anything but commendation in any writer, whether
great or small; but rather, that the art of concealing art
had not yet dawned upon Chaucer.
Closely allied to Chaucer’s liveliness and gaiety of dis¬
position, and in part springing from them, are his keen sense
of the ridiculous and the power of satire which he has at his
command. His humour has many varieties, ranging from
the refined and half-melancholy irony of the House of Fame
[p. 180] to the ready wit of the sagacious uncle of Cressid, the burl¬
esque fun of the inimitable Nun’s Priest's Tale, and the very
gross salt of the Reeve, the Miller, and one or two others. . . .
Concerning, however, Chaucer’s use of the power which he in
so large a measure possessed, viz. that of covering with ridi¬
cule the palpable vices or weaknesses of the classes or kinds
of men represented by some of his character-types, one
assertion may be made with tolerable safety. Whatever
may have been the first stimulus and the ultimate scope of
the wit and humour which he here expended, they are not
to be explained as moral indignation in disguise. And in
truth Chaucer’s merriment flows spontaneously from a
source very near the surface; he is so extremely diverting,
because he is so extremely diverted himself.
Herein, too, lies the harmlessness of Chaucer's fun. Its
harmlessness, to wit, for those who are able to read him in
something like the spirit in which he wrote.
But the realism of Chaucer is something more than exuber¬
ant love of fun and light-hearted gaiety. He is the first
great painter of character, because he is the first great
observer of it among European writers. ... More especially
with regard to the manners and ways of women, which
often, while seeming so natural to women themselves, appear
so odd to male observers, Chaucer's eye was ever on the
alert.
. . . . . . .
[p. 187] His descriptions of nature are as true as his sketches of
human character; and incidental touches in him reveal his
love of the one as unmistakably as his unflagging interest
in the study of the other. Even those May-morning exordia,
in which he was but following a fashion—faithfully observed
both by the French trouvères and by the English romances
translated from their productions and not forgotten by the
author of the earlier part of the Roman de la Rose—always
came from his hands with the freshness of natural truth. ...
For nowhere does he seem, and nowhere could he
have been, more open to the influence which he received
into himself, and which in his turn he exercised, and
exercises, upon others, than when he was in fresh contact
with nature. In this influence lies the secret of his genius;
in his poetry there is life.
[Chap. IV, 'Epilogue gives a sketch of the influence of
Chaucer.']