1874. Green, John Richard. A Short History of the English People
(Macmillan & Co.), pp. 163-4, 212, 213-6, 229, 231, 248, 249,
287, 288, 290.
[pp. 163-4] [Alfred’s English and Chaucer’s.]
[p. 212] [The Testament of Love. Its author’s love of English.]
[pp. 213-
[Outline of Chaucer’s biography, and note on his appear¬
16]
ance according to Hoccleve’s portrait and his own words.
His passage in the Hous of Fame on his evening study and
work.]
[p. 212] But of this abstraction from his fellows there is no trace
in his verse. No poetry was ever more human than Chaucer's;
none ever came more frankly and genially home to its readers.
... Nothing is more unreal than the tone of the French
romance, nothing more absolutely real than the tone of
Chaucer. If with the best modern critics we reject from the list
of his genuine works the bulk of the poems which preceded
"Troilus and Cressida," we see at once that, familiar as he
was with the literature of the Trouvères, his real sympathies
drew him not to the dying verse of France, but to the new
and mighty upgrowth of poetry in Italy. Dante’s eagle
looks at him from the sun. "Fraunces Petrark, the laureat
poete" is to him one "whose rethorique sweete enlumyned
al Itaile of poetrie. The "Troilus" is an enlarged English
version of Boccaccio’s "Filistrato," the Knight’s Tale of his
Teseide. It was, indeed, the "Decameron" which suggested
the very form of the "Canterbury Tales." But even while
changing, as it were, the front of English poetry, Chaucer
preserves his own distinct personality. If he quizzes in the
rime of Sir Thopaz, the wearisome idleness of the French
romance, he retains all that was worth retaining of the
French temper, its rapidity and agility of movement, its
[p. 215] lightness and brilliancy of touch, its airy mockery, its gaiety
and good humour, its critical coolness and self-control. The
French wit quickens in him more than in any English
writer the sturdy sense and shrewdness of our national dis¬
position, corrects its extravagance, and relieves its somewhat
ponderous morality. If, on the other hand, he echoes the
joyous carelessness of the Italian tale, he tempers it with
the English seriousness. As he follows Boccaccio, all his
changes are on the side of purity; and when the Troilus of
the Florentine ends with the old sneer at the changeableness,
of woman, Chaucer bids us "look Godward," and dwells on
the unchangeableness of Heaven.
But the genius of Chaucer was neither French nor Italian,
whatever element it might borrow from either literature, but
English to the core.
[General discussion of the Tales and the pilgrims.]
[p. 216] . . . It is the first time in English poetry that we are
brought face to face not with characters or allegories or
reminiscences of the past, but with living and breathing
men, men distinct in temper and sentiment as in face or
costume or mode of speech; and with this distinctness of
each maintained throughout the story by a thousand shades
of expression and action. It is the first time, too, that we
meet with the dramatic power which not only creates each
character, but combines it with its fellows, which not only
adjusts each tale or jest to the temper of the person who
utters it, but fuses all into a poetic unity. ... He has
received his training from war, courts, business, travel—a
training not of books, but of life. And it is life that he
loves—the delicacy of its sentiment, the breadth of its force,
its laughter and its tears, the tenderness of its Grisildis or
the Smollett-like adventures of the miller and the schoolboy.
It is this largeness of heart, this wide tolerance, which enables
him to reflect man for us as none but Shakspeare has ever
reflected it, but to reflect it with a pathos, a shrewd sense
and kindly humour, a freshness and joyousness of feeling,
[pp. 229-
that even Shakspeare has not surpassed.
231]
[p. 248] Nothing brings more vividly home to us the social chasm
[Chaucer’s satire of the clerics.]
which in the fourteenth century severed the rich from the
poor than the contrast between the "Complaint of Piers the
Ploughman" and the "Canterbury Tales." The world of
wealth and ease and laughter through which the courtly
Chaucer moves with eyes downcast as in a pleasant dream
is a far-off world of wrong and of ungodliness to the gaunt
poet of the poor. ...
[For the passages on Chaucer, re-handled in the History
of the English People, see below, Green, 1877-80.]