1870. Unknown. Article, The Text of Chaucer [in] the Edinburgh
Review, July, 1870, No. cclxix, pp. I-45.
[p. 1] It is a national reproach that after the lapse of nearly five
hundred years we are still without a critical and illus¬
trative edition of Chaucer’s poetical works. Excepting
Shakspeare, no English poet so thoroughly requires and
deserves careful editing as Chaucer; and, in the essential
characteristics of his genius, no English poet comes nearer
to Shakspeare.
[pp. 2, 3] [Chaucer's dramatic insight, love of nature, wide human
interest, and felicity of expression.]
These excellences have justly made Chaucer not only the
father of English poetry, the greatest of our dramatists before
the rise of the regular drama, but one of the most delightful
and habitually read of all English poets. The many eulo-
gistic references to him by later writers both in prose and
verse, down to the close of the Elizabethan period, show how
constantly he was studied during the two centuries after his
death. In the first century we have repeated and emphatic
testimony to his pre-eminent merit by such poets as Lidgate,
Occleve, and Douglas. And in the Elizabethan age there is
a consensus of enthusiastic appreciation amongst almost all
its more distinguished critics, poets, and historians. The
list includes amongst eminent prose writers the names of
Wilson, Puttenham, Ascham, Fox, and Camden; and of
poets Sir Philip Sidney ranks Chaucer with Dante, Petrarch,
[p. 4] and Boccaccio; while Spenser avowedly adopted him as a
master, and commenced his poetic career by direct imitations
of his style. The well-known reference to
'him that left half-told
The story of Cambuscan bold,'
and the quotations from the 'Canterbury Tales' in Milton’s
prose writings, show that Chaucer was not forgotten amidst
the distractions of the Parliamentary conflict and the civil
war. Dryden, again, did his utmost to popularise the more
striking of the 'Canterbury Tales,' and has left, perhaps, the
best critical estimate of their author we possess. During
the eighteenth century there were several elaborate attempts
to make English readers better acquainted with Chaucer,
whose language had by that time become too archaic for
the effortless enjoyment of ordinary readers. And in our
own day, notwithstanding the obstacles interposed by a
grammar and vocabulary partially obsolete, Chaucer has
reappeared in a greater number of forms, and is, perhaps,
more generally read and studied, than any of the great
Elizabethan poets except Shakspeare.
These circumstances render it the more surprising, and,
we may add, the more discreditable to our national scholar¬
ship, that no complete critical edition of Chaucer's poetical
works should yet have been produced. The reproach is one
of old standing, and many suggestions have from time to
time been made with the view of wiping it away.
[Quotation of Dr. Johnson's note on his projected edition.
[p. 5] The truth is, that until the last few years the greater part
See p.  above, also remarks on Todd.]
of Chaucer’s poetical works have never, strictly speaking,
been edited at all. 'Troilus and Cressid,' a story nearly as
long as the 'Æneid,' the 'Romaunt of the Rose,' the 'House
of Fame,' the 'Legend of Good Women,' and the minor
poems, collected and published together for the first time
by Thynne in 1532, were printed from defective and im¬
perfect manuscripts without any critical oversight or correc¬
tion; and from that time to our own day they have been
reprinted from the black-letter folios without any attempt
at systematic critical revision. The 'Canterbury Tales
have, indeed, fared somewhat better, having been more than
once carefully edited by critics in many respects well qualified
for the task. But much still remains to be done for the text
of Chaucer’s greatest work; and still more, perhaps, for the
adequate explanation of its language and allusions. Wo
have as yet no satisfactory and authoritative text even of
the' Canterbury Tales'; and the best published text, that
recently revised by Mr. Morris, to which we shall presently
refer in detail, is without note or comment of any kind.
The work which Johnson projected, and which a succession
of eminent scholars and critics have so earnestly desiderated,
still remains, therefore, to be done.
In these circumstances the formation of a Chaucer Society,
mainly for the purpose of printing the best existing manu¬
scripts of the poet's works, ought to be matter of hearty con¬
gratulation to all lovers of English literature. Our public
and private libraries are rich in Chaucer manuscripts, and
the best of these must be available for critical use before an
authoritative complete and satisfactory text of Chaucer can
be produced. But the only way of placing these manu-
scripts within the reach of English scholars is by printing
them; and, if done at all, this must obviously be the work
of a special Society. With this end in view, the Chaucer
[p. 6] Society was accordingly founded two years ago, and it is
pleasant to find the two great divisions of the Anglo-Saxon
race united in this effort to illustrate the genius and honour
the memory of its first great poet and dramatist. The
Society was set on foot by Mr. F. J. Furnivall, to whose
philological zeal and literary industry students of early
English are already so much indebted. But, as he himself
tells us, it was established very much at the instance of
Professor Child, of Harvard University. ... In the words
of the original prospectus the Society was founded 'to do
honour to Chaucer, and to let the lovers and students of his
works see how far the best unpublished manuscripts differ
from the printed texts.' . . .
The proposal, then, is to begin with "The Canterbury
Tales," and give of them (in parallel columns in royal 4to)
six of the best unprinted manuscripts known, and to add in
another quarto the next best manuscripts if 300 subscribers
join the Society.'
This excellent plan has so far been carried out with com¬
mendable diligence and fidelity. Early in 1869, the first
part of the six-text edition, containing the 'Prologue' and
the 'Knight’s Tale,' was issued in the two forms of separate
octavo texts, and of all the texts together in a six-columned
oblong folio. All the texts are handsomely printed, and, as
we can testify from experience, the oblong folio is extremely
convenient for collocation and reference. Great care, more-
over, appears to have been taken in printing the texts so as
to render them as accurate transcripts of the manuscript as
possible.
[Account of Chaucer Society Aims and Publications.
Value of the latter to students. Only seventy subscribers
in England, and thirty in the United States. Readers
recommended to subscribe.]
[p. 8] From what we have said it will be seen that the publi¬
cations of the Chaucer Society are preparing the way for a
complete edition of Chaucer’s works in the twofold direction
of text and commentary. The requirements of such an
edition are an authoritative text based on a comparison of
the best manuscripts, and an adequate explanation in the
shape of notes and commentary of Chaucer's learning and
literary studies, his allusions, language and versification.
The first point is the text; and, in order to estimate fairly
the work the Chaucer Society is doing in this respect, it is
necessary to glance at the history of the printed texts down
to the present time. Caxton printed the 'Canterbury
Tales' twice, the first time from a very corrupt manuscript,
and the second time from a much better one. 'Troilus and
Cressid,' 'The House of Fame,' 'The Assembly of Fowls,'
and some minor pieces, were printed by Caxton’s coadjutors
and successors, Wyken de Worde and Pynson. The first
edition of Chaucer’s poetical works was that published in
1532, and edited by W. Thynne. In his curious dedication
to Henry VIII, Thynne claims to have corrected, by com¬
parison with the manuscripts, those parts of the poet’s works
already printed, and to have published the rest for the first
time. He says:—
[Thynne quoted ; see above, 1532, vol. i, p. .]
As may be surmised from this extract, Chaucer did not
benefit much from Thynne’s supervision, his text of the
'Canterbury Tales' being in some respects inferior to that
of Caxton’s second reprint, while the minor poems are
crowded with verbal corruptions. Stowe, the next editor,
added little to Thynne’s work, except some miscellaneous
poems, 'now imprinted for the first time,' which fill twenty
pages of his massive folio. These poems are of doubtful
authority, being more in Lidgate’s manner than Chaucer’s;
but the longest of them, 'The Court of Love,' has kept its
place in the subsequent editions of the poet’s works. The
third chief edition published during the sixteenth century is
[p. 9] that edited by Speight, and in many respects he may fairly
be regarded as the first editor, strictly so called, of Chaucer.
Thynne and Stowe paid but little attention to the text;
and neither of them attempted anything in the way of
illustration or commentary. Speight attended in a manner
to both these departments of an editor’s duty; and, though
his alterations in the text are comparatively few and unim¬
portant, they are still in the main improvements. But his
claims as an editor rest mainly on his explanations of
Chaucer’s language. He is the first that attempted any
detailed explanation of archaic words and phrases; and his
glossary, with all its imperfections, entitles him to the grateful
remembrance of Chaucer students. This gratitude would
have been still stronger had Speight told the whole story of
Wade and his bote called Guingelot, as also his straunge
exploits in the same,' instead of simply passing it over 'as
being long and fabulous.' The story was undoubtedly con¬
nected with the northern mythology, and abounded in
marvellous incident. And it is certainly one of the curiosities
of literary history that a story of this nature, so well-known
in the beginning of the seventeenth century that an editor,
in noticing Chaucer’s allusions to it, thinks even an outline
needless, should now have so completely perished that no
fragment of it can be recovered. ... Speight’s compact
folio, first published in 1598, again in 1602, with some im¬
provements, and a third time in 1687, with a few trifling
additions, continued to be the standard edition of Chaucer
throughout the whole of the seventeenth century. Down to
the beginning of the eighteenth century, indeed, the collected
works of our more celebrated poets generally appeared in
the folio form, and the folio belongs to the pre-critical period
of our literary history. Urry’s ambitious work, which ap¬
peared in 1721 and has the distinction of being the tallest of
all the Chaucer folios, is certainly no exception. The licen¬
tious alterations of the text, in which Urry habitually in¬
dulged, have simply made it perversely corrupt in every part.
The truth is that Urry, though in some respects an accom¬
plished man and a lover of our early literature, was altogether
ignorant of Chaucer’s language and versification; and the
arbitrary alterations by which he claims to have 'in a great
measure restored and perfected the text,' have in numberless
lines destroyed both the grammar and the metre, and in many
the sense as well.
[p.10] The first editor of any part of Chaucer's works who dis¬
played anything like the spirit and power of genuine criticism
was undoubtedly Dr. Thomas Morell, best remembered per¬
haps by his learned 'Thesaurus' ... Dr. Morell was, how¬
ever, an English as well as a classical scholar, having edited
Spenser, and commenced the publication of the 'Canterbury
Tales' on a thoroughly complete and satisfactory plan. The
only matter of regret is that he did not carry out his admirable
scheme and finish the work he had so well begun. The first
volume of the projected work, and we believe the only one
ever issued, appeared in 1737, and was entitled 'The Can¬
terbury Tales of Chaucer in the original, from the most
authentic manuscripts, with references to authors ancient
and modern, various readings, and explanatory notes.'
This volume contains the 'Prologue' and the 'Knight’s
Tale,' a modern version of each being appended to the
original text. Tyrwhitt refers to it in terms of high but
just praise; and it appears from his reference to have been
the only part of the work that had been published. Mr.
Robert Bell, however, in his introduction to the edition of
Chaucer in the Annotated English Poets, says that 'the
"Canterbury Tales" were published in 1740 by Dr. T.
Morell;' and that this is the edition to which Mr. Tyrwhitt
gives the date of 1737.' The last part of the statement is
certainly inaccurate, as the volume of 1737 lies before us,
and is evidently that to which Tyrwhitt refers, and which
he used in preparing his own edition for the press. And
we feel convinced that the first part of Mr. Bell’s statement
is also inaccurate, and that the volume of 1737 is the only
part of Dr. Morell’s projected work that ever appeared. This
part is, however, quite sufficient to show that in undertaking
to edit Chaucer Dr. Morell took a just and comprehensive
view of the work to be done, and that he possessed many
of the higher qualities essential to its successful execution.
His plan includes minute attention both to text and com¬
mentary; and in dealing with the text 'he set out,' says
Tyrwhitt, 'upon the only rational plan, that of collating the
best manuscripts and selecting from them the genuine read¬
ings.' For this purpose he examined no fewer than fifteen
manuscripts of the 'Canterbury Tales;' and, while adopting
the best and most authoritative readings in the text, he gave
all the more important manuscript variations in the shape
of a separate textual appendix. This full and accurate
exhibition of various readings gives indeed to Dr. Morell’s
p. 11] work a more scholarly character and a higher critical value
than belongs to any other edition of the 'Prologue' and
'Knight’s Tale.' And so great is his respect for the authority
of the best manuscripts, that he sometimes gives a reading
from them, even although he does not fully understand it.
Thus in the description of the knight he was the first to
adopt the manuscript reading of the line—
'In Lettowe hadde he reysed and in Ruce.'
The previous editions had ridden, but Dr. Morell, while
mistaking its meaning, restored reysed (journeyed, travelled).
on the authority of the great majority of the ancient manu¬
scripts, and in this he has been followed by subsequent editors.
[Then follow comments and quotations on Morell and Urry's
views of Chaucer’s versification.]
[p.12] We can only glance at Dr. Morell’s scheme of illustration,
which is as judicious and complete as his method of dealing
with the text. It includes brief notes at the foot of the page,
explaining archaic words, phrases, and allusions, and often
containing parallel passages from the poets ancient and
modern, and a commentary in the shape of an appendix
explaining at greater length the historical allusions of the
text, as well as its references to contemporary life and
manners. The explanation of obsolete words is sometimes
inaccurate, and the etymology often erroneous; but con¬
sidering the low state of English philology at the time, this
part of the work is well done, and generally, both in con¬
ception and execution, the volume is well entitled to Tyr¬
whitt’s praise of 'being infinitely preferable to any of those
that preceded it.' It may indeed even yet be favourably
compared with some that have followed it, and that have
had the good fortune to become better known.
Tyrwhitt comes next as an editor of Chaucer, and his
edition of the 'Canterbury Tales' is so well known that it
is needless to specify its merits and defects in detail. In
our judgment, the merits of the work far outweigh its defects,
although in the present state of our knowledge the text
must no doubt be regarded as seriously defective. Still on
the whole Tyrwhitt has done more for Chaucer than any
other single editor. It is no doubt true that he was un¬
acquainted with the niceties of Chaucer’s grammar, and their
intimate connexion with the mechanism of his verse; and
[p. 13] Mr. Wright, in the introduction to his edition of the 'Canter¬
bury Tales,' has emphasized these deficiencies in somewhat
sweeping terms. But Tyrwhitt was a sagacious critic, pos¬
sessing great literary knowledge, taste, and industry; and
he brought all his powers and acquirements to the illustration
of his favourite author, often with the happiest results. ...
The next step in the history of Chaucer texts is the publi¬
cation of this manuscript—the Harleian—by Mr. Wright in
1847. This publication represents something like a revolution
in the plan of editing Chaucer, and at once raises the whole
question as to the best method of dealing with the text. At
first sight Mr. Wright seems to make out a strong case for his
own plan. After noticing that the grammatical forms of the
fourteenth century underwent a considerable change about the
middle of the fifteenth, and that copyists of this date usually
employed the language of the time rather than of the author
they are copying, he contends that the only satisfactory plan
of editing Chaucer is to select the oldest and best manuscript,
and to adhere to it faithfully throughout. The opposite plan,
which had hitherto been usually followed, he condemns
indeed in no very measured terms:—
'It is evident, therefore,' he says, 'that the plan of forming
the text of any work of the periods of which we are speaking
from a number of different manuscripts, written at different
time and different places, is the most absurd plan which it
is possible to conceive. Yet this was the method professedly
followed by Tyrwhitt in forming a text of the "Canterbury
Tales" of Chaucer.'
And after pointing out Tyrwhitt’s special disqualifications
as a student of manuscripts, he adds :—
'Under these circumstances it is clear that to form a satis¬
factory text of Chaucer, we must give up the printed editions,
and fall back upon the manuscripts; and that instead of
bundling them altogether, we must pick out one best manu¬
script which also is one of those nearest to Chaucer’s time.
The latter circumstance is absolutely necessary, if we would
reproduce the language and versification of the author. At
the same time it cannot but be acknowledged that the earliest
manuscripts might possibly be very incorrect and incomplete,
from the ignorance or negligence of the scribe who copied
it. This, however, is not the case with regard to Chaucer's
p. 14] "Canterbury Tales." The Harleian manuscript, No. 7334,
is by far the best manuscript of Chaucer's "Canterbury
Tales" that I have yet examined, in regard both to antiquity
and correctness. The handwriting is one which would at
first sight be taken by an experienced scholar for that of the
latter part of the fourteenth century, and it must have been
written within a few years after 1400, and therefore soon
after Chaucer's death and the publication of the "Canterbury
Tales." Its language has very little, if any, appearance of
local dialect; and the text is in general extremely good, the
variations from Tyrwhitt being usually for the better.'
This reasoning seems, as we have said, sufficiently conclu¬
sive, and it has very naturally determined the course of sub¬
sequent editors, both Mr. Bell and Mr. Morris having followed
Mr. Wright's plan, and adopted the text he had selected.
But the publication of the Chaucer Society six-text edition
of the 'Prologue' and 'Knight's Tale' has very much
destroyed the force of Mr. Wright's plea in favour of adhering
strictly to a single text. A comparison of the Harleian
text with the six now publishing by the Society, will show
that there are numberless points of grammar, metre, or sense
in which it may be improved by careful collation, and that
the old plan must still be followed before we can hope to
secure a satisfactory and authoritative text. We propose to
illustrate this necessity more in detail by a comparison of
Mr. Morris's text—the best form of the Harleian—with the
six other texts now available for critical collation. Mean¬
while, to complete the account of texts, we must refer for
a moment to the edition of Chaucer's Poetical Works, edited
by Mr. Robert Bell for the Annotated Edition of the English
Poets. As we have said, Mr. Bell and his colleague Mr.
Jephson adopt the Harleian text, making alterations here and
there, which are not, however, in all cases improvements,
They are, however, fairly entitled to the credit of having
attempted almost for the first time to edit the minor poems,
as well as of having given throughout a number of useful
miscellaneous notes. ...
p. 15] The latest text of Chaucer's poetical works, that edited by
Mr. Morris, and substituted for Tyrwhitt's in the new issue of
the Aldine Series, is undoubtedly also the best. Mr. Morris
is one of our most accurate and accomplished early English
scholars, and no better editor of a mediæval text could possibly
be found. After examining several manuscripts of the
'Canterbury Tales,' he agreed with Mr. Wright in thinking
the Harleian text the best, and it has accordingly been
selected and faithfully adhered to throughout. Clerical
errors and corrupt readings were corrected by collation with
other manuscripts, especially the Lansdowne, and a careful
examination of Mr. Morris's text will show how painstaking
he has been in this part of his work. The rest of the poems
have been edited from the manuscripts where they existed,
and the result is the best text of Chaucer that has yet appeared.
Good as it is, however, we hope to show that something better
may be produced by turning to full account the valuable
materials the Chaucer Society are providing for critical use.
As we have seen, Mr. Morris gives what all recent editors have
regarded as the best manuscript of the 'Canterbury Tales,'
in the best form, carefully revised, and corrected throughout.
The important question is, whether a still better text may
not be produced by the critical collation of other manuscripts.
Mr. Wright, as we have seen, scouts this notion; and even
Mr. Furnivall, the editor of the Chaucer Society texts, seems
disposed to answer it in a somewhat hesitating manner. At
least he expresses himself as disappointed at the extent of
general agreement between the manuscripts the Society has
undertaken to publish.
A comparison of Mr. Morris’s text of the 'Prologue' and
the 'Knight’s Tale' with the texts of the Society, has,
however, convinced us that the question as to possible
improvement must be answered decisively in the affirmative.
Knowing beforehand the excellence of the Harleian text, and
the general agreement of the six other manuscripts, we have
been surprised indeed at the number of emendations of
greater or less importance they afford. In the 'Prologue'
alone there are, in our judgment, upwards of fifty lines that
may be improved by collation either in sense or metre, while
in the 'Knight’s Tale' the better readings are in proportion
to its length even more numerous and important. These
better readings affect mainly the metre, the meaning, or the
poetical expressiveness of the existing text. Some, again,
effect marked improvements in minutiæ of grammar, em¬
phasis, and spelling. While nothing can be more arbitrary
and unsettled than the orthography of Chaucer’s day, and
indeed for centuries later, the spelling of the Harleian manu¬
script is still peculiarly harsh and clumsy, especially in the
case of proper names, and they might easily be altered for
the better on the authority of the other texts. The improve¬
ments in the metre are effected sometimes by the simple
transposition of words in the line, sometimes by exchanging
one form of word for another, and often in both ways. Some¬
times again by the omission of a superfluous word or syllable,
and at others by the introduction of a word or syllable that at
once fills up the measure and completes the sense. The read¬
ings that improve the meaning do so usually by removing
vagueness and ambiguity, and giving increased clearness and
precision to the image or idea presented. This is accom¬
plished in various ways, sometimes by the apt use of defining
epithets and particles, as this lord instead of the lord (172),
that house instead of an house (578), the chieftain instead of
a chieftain (1697). Sometimes by a slight change in the
form of the noun or verb, as shall not die instead of should
not (1683), taketh his leeve instead of took his leeve (359),
hearkeneth, the true imperative form, instead of hearken (985),
full of degrees instead of full of degree (1032), the noblest of the
Greeks instead of the nobles (2041).
[Pp. 16-33 are devoted to the discussion of various textual
readings,—all worthy of serious notice,—wherein the impor¬
tance of the Chaucer Society’s Six-Text points is shown.]
[p. 23] Quite as much still remains to be done for the illustration as
for the text of Chaucer’s poetical works. There are in his
writings almost innumerable points of philological, literary,'
or historical interest that require to be elucidated. Chaucer
was not only familiar with every phase of contemporary life,
but profoundly read in all existing literature. He knew by
intimate personal experience the tastes and habits, the
pursuits and recreations, the superstitions and beliefs, of all
ranks and classes amongst his own countrymen; and his
public employments had enlarged the field of his observation
so as to include almost every country in Europe. He had
seen active military service abroad, and had taken part in
splendid public ceremonials at home; had lived habitually
in courts, camps and great cities, as well as in the congenial
[p. 34] retirement of country life. The whole world of nature and
human experience was in this way mirrored in his sunny
intellect, while the higher influences of both had melted
serenely into the quiet depths of his curiously meditative
and observant mind. As a natural result there is a mellowed
fulness in his maturer delineations; a joyous animation, a
living truth, a variety and completeness of detail in his pictures
of life that obscure at first the purely literary or academical
accomplishments of his mind; or rather, perhaps, it would be
more correct to say that in his later works the learning and
knowledge of life are so fused by imaginative sympathy into
a new poetical whole, that there is at first no distinct con¬
sciousness of the separate elements. The appreciative
reader of Chaucer is so enchanted by his descriptive power
and constructive art—so carried on and absorbed in the
enjoyment of the work as a whole—that he does not pause to
notice the felicity of allusive detail, the golden threads
derived from elder looms, that are wrought with exquisite
skill into the texture, and help to give richness and brilliancy
to the new fabric. On closer examination, however, the
range and minuteness of Chaucer's learning becomes clearly
apparent. He employed materials derived from all existing
literatures home and foreign; not only the early English
chronicles and stories, the Norman-French romances and
fables, the new epic and lyrical poetry of Italy, and the whole
range of Latin literature, including not only the classics
proper, as well as the science and art, the history and philo¬
sophy of the time, but also Byzantine legends and brilliant
fragments of Eastern romance, that had passed into Europe
in the wake of the returning Crusaders. The adequate
illustration of Chaucer thus requires, in addition to a minute
acquaintance with the state of the language in his day, a
full knowledge of contemporary literature and history. No
single editor has as yet united these requirements. Tyrwhitt,
who studied with some care the literature and history of the
fourteenth century, was comparatively ignorant of Chaucer's
language; while recent editors, such as Mr. Wright and
Mr. Morris, who are well acquainted with Chaucer’s lan¬
guage, have attempted hardly anything in the way of literary
or historical illustration.
But the primary requirement of all expository criticism of
Chaucer is undoubtedly the full interpretation of his language.
While extended literary and historical illustration may
perhaps be regarded as critical luxuries, the first and most
essential condition of any intelligent study of his poetry is
that its obscurities of phrase and diction should as far as
[p. 35] possible be explained. There is still, however, a great deal
to be done for the elucidation of Chaucer’s language; and,
unfortunately, Mr. Morris, who of living scholars is in many
respects best qualified for the work, has confined his labours
in this direction to a revision of previous glossaries. ...
[An examination of Morris’s Glossary follows.]
[p. 40] This [comparison with Piers Plowman] points to an import¬
ant means of interpreting Chaucer’s language which has not
as yet been turned to anything like adequate account. We
refer to the critical examination of the writings of his con¬
temporaries and immediate successors. The more carefully
the early literature of the fourteenth century is studied, the
more clearly will it appear that Chaucer's additions to the
vocabulary of the language are far less numerous than is
commonly supposed. He has been charged with adulterating
the English speech of his time by the wholesale importation
of foreign, and especially of Norman-French, words. In his
early translations and paraphrases from Norman-French he
occasionally, it is true, transfers words mainly for the con¬
venience of their rhymes. But with these exceptions his
importations are comparatively few. His real superiority
lies in the admirable taste and judgment displayed in the
selection of his vocabulary, the natural reflex of his keen and
exquisite sensibility to the latent significance of language.
The perfection of his art lies in his subtle insight into the
deeper meaning of words, and his power of combining them
in the most felicitous manner. He is not fond of verbal
novelties for their own sake, and his obscurities of phrase
and diction may generally therefore be explained by a
reference to the literature of the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries. The works of Gower and Lidgate, especially the
latter, are of essential service in this respect.