1874. Minto, William. Characteristics of the English Poets from
Chaucer to Shirley, Edinburgh, 1874, pp. vii, 1-58 [Chapter I:
Geoffrey Chaucer], 61-6, 70-7, 81, 90, 91, 96, 99, 101-2, 105, 111,
122-6, 129, 130, 133-4, 143, 146, 149, 153, 170, 171, 213, 219,
220, 301.
[The Biography in the Chaucerian part is based on the
latest discoveries of Furnivall and other scholars, as well as
on the older material. Minto thinks the idea of Chaucer's
"hopeless passion" in early life (based on the Complaint of
Pity.) etc. has been made too much of. A comparison be¬
tween Chaucer and Shakspere in their knowledge of men is
made, p. 17. Ten Brink's division of Chaucer's work into
three periods is rejected, as it seems to Minto that, from
first to last Chaucer had more affinity with the French than
with the Italians; and he adds: "I can distinguish no
change either in his methods or in his spirit that is fairly
attributable to Italian influence," p. 19. The work of Ten
Brink, Bradshaw and Furnivall in proving the un-Chaucerian
character of the Testament of Love, Assembly of Ladies,
Lamentation of Mary Magdalene, Court of Love, Flower and
Leaf, and Chaucer’s Dream, is described. As the chief argu¬
ment is the y-ye rhyme, and as this is found in the Romaunt,
the whole question, according to Minto, depends largely on
this poem. Minto apparently clings to the belief of the
genuineness of the Court of Love. He remarks]:
[p. 21] It is simply incredible that these poems could have been
written by a poet whose name has perished. If he had
written before Chaucer, which could hardly be seriously
maintained, he could not but have become famous; and the
probability is that Chaucer would have mentioned him as
[p. 22] the model of his seven-line stanza. If he had written after
Chaucer, he would certainly have mentioned Chaucer in his
list of masters, according to the universal habit of the time.
The idea of deliberate forgery is out of the question; and if
the "Court of Love" had been the work of a forger or an
imitator, the artificial restriction of rhyme was precisely the
sort of thing he would labour to observe. Finally, the
"Court of Love" is unmistakably imitated in the 'King’s
Quhair' of James I, whose captivity in England began
only five years after Chaucer’s death, and yet he mentions
no master except Chaucer, Gower and Lydgate. That
makes it quite clear that James attributed the "Court of
Love" to Chaucer; and what need is there for further
evidence?
[Subsequent sections of the Chaucer portion are, II.
His Language, Metres and Imagery. III. The Chief
Qualities of his Poetry. IV. His Delineation of Character.]
[p. 54] Observe, accordingly, how the tales are distributed. Nothing
ribald is put into the mouth of the gentles, and nothing ribald
is told concerning their order. ... [Elaboration of this.]