1880. Palgrave, Francis Turner. The Visions of England. Fifty copies
printed, 1880, pp. 36-39.
THE PILGRIM AND THE PLOUGHMAN:
[stanza 3] Beyond the bridge a mazy forest swims,
1382 . . .
Great sails and spars and flame-tongued flags on high,
Wedged ronnd the quays, a-throng with ruddy limbs
And faces bronzed beneath another sky:
And ’mid the press sits one with aspect shy
And downcast eyes of watching, and, the while,
The deep observance of an inward smile.
In hooded mantle gray he smiled and sate,
With ink-horn at his knees and scroll and pen,
And took the toll and register’d the freight,
'Mid noise of clattering cranes and strife of men:
And all that moved and spoke was in his ken,
In hues and lines like Nature’s own design’d
Within the magic mirror of his mind.
Thence oft, returning homeward, on the book,—
His of Certaldo, or the bard whose lays
Were lost to love in Scythia,—he would look
Till his fix’d eyes the dancing letters daze:
Then forth to the near fields, and feed his gaze
On one fair flower in starry myriads spread,
And in her graciousness be comforted:—
Then, joyous with a poet's joy, to draw
With genial touch, and strokes of patient skill,
The very image of each thing he saw :—
He limn’d the man all round, for good or ill,
Having both sighs and laughter at his will;
And picture-like his soul the world survey’d,
Yet stood outside the picture that he made.
—Man's inner passions in their conscience-strife,
The conflicts of the heart against the heart,
The mother yearning o’er the infant's life,
The maiden wrong’d by wealth and lecherous art,
The leper’s loathsome cell from man apart
War's savage lust and fire, the village woe,
The tinsel chivalry veiling shame below,—
Not his to draw,—to see, perhaps:—Our eyes
Hold bias with our humour:— His, to paint
With Nature's freshness, what before him lies:
The knave, the fool; the frolicsome, the quaint:
His the broad jest, the laugh without restraint,
The ready tears, the spirit lightly moved;
Loving his world, and by his world beloved.
So forth fared Chaucer on his pilgrimage
Through England’s humours; in immortal song
Bodying the form and pressure of his age,
Tints gay as pure, and delicate as strong;
Still to the Tabard the blithe travellers throng,
Seen in his mind so vividly, that we
Know them more nearly than the men we see.
Fair France, bright Italy those numbers train'd;
First in his pages Nature wedding Art
Of all our sons of song ; yet he remain’d
True English of the English at his heart:—
He stood between two worlds, yet had no part
In that new order of the dawning day
Which swept his realm of chivalry away.
. . . . . . . . . .
[stanza 14, Then on the mead in vision Langland saw
p. 38]
A pilgrim throng; not missal-bright as those
Whom Chaucer’s hand surpass'd itself to draw,
Gay as the lark, and brilliant as the rose;—
But such as dungeon foul or spital shows,
Or the serf's fever-den, or field of fight,
When festering sunbeams on the wounded smite.