1880. Unknown. Chaucer and his Circle [in] The Catholic World,
August 1880, vol. xxxi, pp. 695-710.
[p. 686] Chaucer’s eternal freshness is a relief after the faded
studio properties of the modern school [Morris, Swinburne
and Rossetti], and a ramble in his fields,
"All full of freshest flowers, white and red,"
the best remedy for the poetical scarlet-fever that has
afflicted us. . . .
[p. 697] An impartial examination of the portions ot his writings
which induced even the amiable Miss Mitford to applaud
him for his Protestant tendencies will show that Chaucer,
like all true Catholics of his time, saw that pride and luxury
sloth and simony, hiding under the desecrated cloak of
religion, were separating the threads of the sacred garment. ...
Like most poets, Chaucer demanded more of the ideal
from the world than he was willing to give himself. His
airy ridicule often played about abuses more for wanton¬
ness than from any desire to mend them. Vice was
picturesque, and, while deploring it, he could not help
enjoying, from an art point of view, its colors and half-tints. ...
[More showing that Chaucer was not Protestant.]
[p. 700] Although Chaucer, as well as Dante, shaped his language
—beat and crushed gold out of the ore—yet the rich cadences
of the Florentine cause the Englishman's lines to seem weak
and rugged. It is a bagpipe to an organ. The English of
Tennyson—refined by five centuries—has gained much, and
[p. 701] the Italian of Dante will never gain more than he gave it;
but, in spite of the roughness of Chaucer’s medium, there is
a purity and melody in it which has never been successfully
imitated. It is liquid, translucent. There is a directness
and simplicity about Chaucer to which the higher and more
serious poet never attained. . . .
[Instances from Troilus. On Chaucer’s pathos; his
indebtedness to trouvères and Italians; the modernizations
of Pope and Dryden inferior to him, p. 704. Then follow
accounts of Gower, Lydgate, Occleve, Henryson, and James I.]