1879. Fleay, F. G. Some Folk-Lore from Chaucer [in] Folk-Lore
Record, vol. ii, pp. 135, 136, 145-55.
Proverbs.
p. 136] It is hard to draw a line as to these, so as to determine
what are pithy sayings of Chaucer's own and what are genuine
folk-words which ought to be extracted here. I have tried to
err on the side of omission rather than risk inserting what
might mislead future investigators.
[Here follows a list of 89 proverbs, with references to Bell’s
edition; those in parentheses are to Morris's edition.]
Dreams.
Dreams play so important a part in Chaucer's writings, as
to demand a separate notice. Nearly every poem of his which
has a personal reference to himself or his patrons is written
under the form of a dream. 1. The Romaunt of the Rose;
2. Chaucer's Dream; 3. The death of the Duchess; 4. The
House of Fame; 5. The Assembly of Birds; 6. The Legend
of Good Women—are all dreams ... In all these poems a
regular sequence can be traced if they be read chronologically;
in the references to May, to Scipio's dream, to Valentine's
day, to the song of birds, to the causes of dreaming, &c., &c.
But this could only be propery displayed in a commentery on
the passages referred to.
In Troylus there are many references to dreams. Cryseide
has dreamed thrice of Pandarus ... Pandarus gives his
opinions on the matter as Chaucer does in the House of Fame.
"They mean nothing" says he "they proceed of melancholy.
... Nevertheless Troylus has true dreams of the boar Diomed
(vi, 40, 47), and Chaucer had not yet adopted Pandar's
scepticism. In the Canterbury Tales the notices of dreams are
much fewer. ... In the Nun’s Priest's we have Chaucer's fullest
statement on the matter. Chanticleer dreams of the fox, but
Partelet tells him dreams are vanity engendered of repletions,
complexions, abundant humours; the red fox, for instance, by
abundance of red choler, black boars by abundance of melan¬
choly, and bids him "take a laxative" and believe in Cato.
But Chanticleer answers with the well-known case given by
Cicero, the dreams of Kenelm, Scipio, Daniel, Joseph, Pharaoh,
Cresus, Andromache, and gets the best of the argument. His
own dream is a true one. ... On the whole it seems that
Chaucer believed in prophetic dreams granted by special
revelation, but not in oneiromancy as applied to ordinary
dreams.
[Next follow notes on]
[p. 145 to
p. 154]
Astrology and Alchemy.
[p. 5]
Hagiology.
I have under this head collected the allusions to Saints that
occur in Chaucer's works, independently of the Fathers,
allusions to whose writings I have collected in MS. not here
printed. [Here follow twenty-seven allusions, arranged by
poems; and then some Notes on The House of Fame; on
Troilus and Cresseyde (the puns: "Troy distroyed; Calkas
Calkelyng," in (i, 10, 11) v, 19, 20; and the blaunch fevere
of (i, 131), v, 49, and the observance of May, etc., etc.)].