1873. Ruskin, John. Love's Meinie, Lecture I, The Robin. Works of
Ruskin, Library edn., ed. E. T. Cook and A. Wedderburn, 1906,
vol. xxv, pp. 40-3.
But I cannot let you go without asking you to compare
the English and French feeling about small birds, in Chaucer's
time, with our own on the same subject. I say English and
French, because the original French of the Romance of the
Rose shows more affection for birds than even Chaucer's
translation, passionate as he is, always in love for any one
of his little winged brothers or sisters. Look, however,
either in the French or English at the description of the
coming of the God of Love, leading his carol-dance, in the
garden of the Rose.
[p. 41] His dress is embroidered with figures of flowers and of
beasts; but about him fly the living birds. The French
is :—
Il etoit tout couvert d’oisiaulx
De rossignols et de papegaux
De calendre, et de mesangel,
Il sembloit que ce fut une angle
Qui fuz tout droit venuz du ciel."
36. There are several points of philology in this tran¬
sitional French, and in Chaucer's translation, which it is
worth your patience to observe. The monkish Latin
"angelus," you see, is passing through the very unpoetical
form "angle," into "ange"; but in order to get a rhyme,
with it in that angular form, the French troubadour expands
the bird’s name, "mesange," quite arbitrarily, into "mesan¬
gel." Then Chaucer, not liking the "mes" at the beginning
of the word, changes that unscrupulously into "arch";
and gathers in, though too shortly, a lovely bit from another
place about the nightingales flying so close round Love’s
head that they strike some of the leaves off his crown of
roses; so that the English runs thus:—
"But nightingales, a full great route. ..."
[and 8 following lines, Romaunt, 906].
Now, when I first read this bit of Chaucer, without re¬
ferring to the original, I was greatly delighted to find that
there was a bird in his time called an archangel, and set to
work, with brightly hopeful industry, to find out what it
[p. 42] was. I was a little discomfited by finding that in old botany
the word only meant "dead-nettle," but was still sanguine
about my bird, till I found the French form descend, as you
have seen, into a mesangel, and finally into mésange, which
is a provincialism from μεῐον, and means, the smallest of
birds—or, specially here,—a titmouse. I have seldom had
a less expected or more ignominious fall from the clouds. ...
Ibid. Lecture III, The Dabchicks, vol. xxv, p. 81.
[A reference to ouzel in Chaucer, as the feminine of oiseau].
Ibid., Appendix, p. 134.
[Bird-names in Chaucer].