1872. Ruskin, John. Ariadne Florentina, Lecture I, Definition of Art
of Engraving; Works of Ruskin, Library edn., ed. E. T. Cook and
A. Wedderburn, 1906, vol. xxii, pp. 314-5.
Here is a copy of one ["Debonnaireté"] of the lost
frescoes of our Painted Chamber of Westminster;—
fourteenth-century work, entirely conceived in colour ...
[The painter] expects you to consider what it is to be
debonnaire, and to remember your Chaucer's description
of the virtue :—
"She was not brown, nor dun of hue,
But white as snowe, fallen new,
With eyen glad, and browes bent,
Her hair down to her heeles went,
And she was simple, as dove on tree,
Full debonnair of heart was she."
[1 Footnote by editors: The Romaunt of the Rome, 1213, 1214, 1217-24.]
27. You see Chaucer dwells on the colour just as much
as the painter does, but the painter has also given her the
English shield to bear, meaning that good-humour, or debon¬
naireté, cannot be maintained by self-indulgence;—only by
fortitude. Farther note, with Chaucer, the "eyen glad,"
and brows "bent" (high-arched and calm), the strong life
(hair down to the heels), and that her gladness is to be
without subtlety,—that is to say, without the slightest
pleasure in any form of advantage-taking, or any shrewd or
mocking wit: "she was simple as dove on tree"; and you
will find that the colour-painting, both in the fresco and in
the poem, is in the very highest degree didactic and intellec¬
tual; and distinguished, as being so, from all inferior forms
of art. Farther, that it requires you yourself first to under¬
stand the nature of simplicity, and to like simplicity in young
ladies better than subtlety. ...
Ibid., Lecture II, Engraving and other Arts. Library edn.,
vol. xxii, pp. 335-6.
57. The junction of the three arts [architecture, sculpture,
painting] in men’s minds, at the best times, is shortly signified
in these words of Chaucer.
Love’s Garden,
Enclosed was, and walled well
"Everidele
With high walls, embatailled,
Portrayed without, and well entayled
With many rich portraitures."1
1 Footnotes by editors: The Romaunt of the Rose, 137-40.
The French original is better still, and gives four arts in
unison:—
"Quant suis avant un pon alé
Et vy un vergier grant et le,
Bien cloz de bon mur batillié
Portrait dehors, et entaillié
Ou [for an] maintes riches escriptures."
Read also carefully the description of the temples of Mars
and Venus in the "Knight’s Tale."2 Contemporary French
uses "entaille" even of solid sculpture and of the living
form; and Pygmalion, as a perfect master, professes wood
carving, ivory carving, wax-work, and iron-work, no less
than stone sculpture.
2 Ruskin quotes the description in vol. viii, p. 269.
"Pimalion, uns entaillieres
Pourtaians en fuz1 et en pierres,
En mettaux, en os, et en cire,
Et en tinte autre matire."2
1 [Footnota by Ruskin:] For "fust," log of wood, erroneously "fer" in the later
printed editions. Compare the account ot the works of Art and Nature, towards the
end of the Romance of the Rose.
2 Le Roman de la Rose, lines 21638 seq.